Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. solar˙model˙v10˙corrected ©ESO 2022
January 4, 2022
Local heating due to convective overshooting and the solar
modelling problem
I. Bara e1;2, T. Constantino1, J. Clarke1, A. Le Saux1;2, T. Go rey4, T. Guillet1, J. Pratt3, D. G. Vlaykov1
1University of Exeter, Physics and Astronomy, EX4 4QL Exeter, UK (e-mail: i.baraffe@ex.ac.uk )
2´Ecole Normale Sup ´erieure, Lyon, CRAL (UMR CNRS 5574), Universit ´e de Lyon, France
3Department of Physics and Astronomy, Georgia State University, Atlanta GA 30303, USA
4Centre for Fusion, Space and Astrophysics, Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
ABSTRACT
Recent hydrodynamical simulations of convection in a solar-like model suggest that penetrative convective ﬂows at the boundary
of the convective envelope modify the thermal background in the overshooting layer. Based on these results, we implement in one-
dimensional stellar evolution codes a simple prescription to modify the temperature gradient below the convective boundary of a
solar model. This simple prescription qualitatively reproduces the behaviour found in the hydrodynamical simulations, namely a
local heating and smoothing of the temperature gradient below the convective boundary. We show that introducing local heating in
the overshooting layer can reduce the sound-speed discrepancy usually reported between solar models and the structure of the Sun
inferred from helioseismology. It also a ects key quantities in the convective envelope, such as the density, the entropy, and the
speed of sound. These e ects could help reduce the discrepancies between solar models and observed constraints based on seismic
inversions of the Ledoux discriminant. Since mixing due to overshooting and local heating are the result of the same convective
penetration process, the goal of this work is to invite solar modellers to consider both processes for a more consistent approach.
Key words. Convection – Hydrodynamics – Stars: evolution – Sun: evolution - helioseismology - interior
1. Introduction
Modelling the internal structure of the Sun is still a challenge.
A recent review by Christensen-Dalsgaard (2021) describes in
detail the long-standing e orts to improve solar models. The so-
lar modelling problem refers to the discrepancy between helio-
seismology and solar interior models that adopt low metallici-
ties predicted by the three-dimensional (3D) atmosphere models
of, for example, Asplund et al. (2009) and Ca au et al. (2011),
in contrast to the high metallicities based on previous litera-
ture compilations by, for example, Anders & Grevesse (1989)
and Grevesse & Noels (1993). Asplund et al. (2021) have re-
cently conﬁrmed with state-of-the-art 3D simulations the rela-
tively low metal abundances for the Sun. Asplund et al. (2021)
consider that their study yields the most reliable solar abun-
dances available today, suggesting that the solar modelling prob-
lem is no longer a problem of abundances but rather a problem
of stellar physics. The treatment of mixing below the convective
zone is one of the key processes that could improve solar mod-
els. Several studies indeed reveal that the process of convective
penetration, also called overshooting, at the bottom of the con-
vective envelope could play an important role in improving the
agreement between solar models and helioseismic constraints
(see for example Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. 2011; Zhang et al.
2012; Buldgen et al. 2019b). Overshooting in solar models has
most often been treated using di usive or instantaneous chemi-
cal mixing. A temperature gradient that sharply transitions from
a nearly adiabatic form to a radiative form is usually assumed,
as suggested by the theoretical work of Zahn (1991). Models
with a smoother transition have also been investigated. Based
on the analysis of models with di erent stratiﬁcations near the
Send o print requests to : I. Bara ebase of the convective zone, Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. (2011)
found that models that better ﬁt the helioseismic data have a
weakly sub-adiabatic temperature gradient in the lower part of
the convective zone and a smooth transition to the radiative gra-
dient in the overshooting layer. But Christensen-Dalsgaard et al.
(2011) noted that the required temperature stratiﬁcation is di -
cult to reconcile with existing overshooting models and numer-
ical simulations. They concluded that only non-local turbulent
convection models could produce the desired degree of smooth-
ness in the transition (see for example Zhang & Li 2012; Zhang
et al. 2012). But these non-local models remain uncertain, and
their description of overshooting under the conditions found at
the base of the solar convective zone is yet to be validated.
Zhang et al. (2019) explored the impact of overshooting by
introducing a parametrised turbulent kinetic energy ﬂux based
on a model with parameters that are adjusted to improve the
helioseismic properties. They suggest that amelioration can be
obtained speciﬁcally below the convective envelope. However,
Zhang et al. (2019) ﬁnd that this model cannot solve the whole
solar problem because such a ﬂux worsens the sound-speed pro-
ﬁle in the deep radiative interior of their solar model. Given the
uncertainties regarding the temperature stratiﬁcation of the over-
shooting region, solar modellers have considered these e ects as
secondary and have focused their e orts on exploring the impact
of solar abundances, microphysics (opacities, equations of state,
nuclear reaction rates), and chemical mixing and di usion (see
details and references in the review of Buldgen et al. 2019a).
Additional, more exotic e ects such as early disk accretion or
solar-wind mass loss (Zhang et al. 2019; Kunitomo & Guillot
2021) are also attracting increasing attention.
To reinvigorate the debate, Buldgen et al. (2019b) recently
highlighted once again how the transition of the temperature gra-
1arXiv:2201.00200v1  [astro-ph.SR]  1 Jan 2022
Barae et al.: Local heating due to convective overshooting and the solar modelling problem
dient just below the convective envelope can signiﬁcantly impact
the disagreement between solar models and helioseismic con-
straints. Their results, based on a method that combines multi-
ple structural inversions, suggest that the transition in temper-
ature gradient is improperly reproduced by adopting either an
adiabatic or a radiative temperature gradient in the overshoot-
ing layer. The solution should be somewhere in between these
two extremes. Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. (2018) also note that
an increase in the temperature at the transition would remove
a remaining small sharp dip in the speed of sound immediately
beneath the convective zone of the model. A major di culty is
to disentangle the e ects of overshoot from the e ects of opaci-
ties, which can also alter the temperature gradient in these layers.
Given the large number of parameters to deal with in order to im-
prove solar models and the current lack of strong arguments in
favour of modifying the thermal stratiﬁcation in the overshoot-
ing layer, there has been no real motivation to deviate from the
traditional picture of a sharp transition as formalised by Zahn
(1991).
The present work is motivated by arguments inspired by hy-
drodynamical simulations of convection and convective penetra-
tion in solar-like models. Recent hydrodynamical simulations by
Barae et al. (2021, hereafter B21) highlight the process of local
heating in the overshooting region due to penetrating convective
motions across the convective boundary. In the following, we
analyse the potential impact of this feature on one-dimensional
(1D) stellar evolution structures in the context of solar models.
The hydrodynamical results of B21 are brieﬂy summarised in
Sect. 2, and their impact on 1D models are analysed in Sect. 3
and discussed in Sect. 4.
2. Modiﬁcation of the thermal background in the
overshooting layer: Results from
two-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations
B21 performed two-dimensional (2D) fully compressible time-
implicit simulations of convection and convective penetration in
a solar-like model with the MUlti-dimensional Stellar Implicit
Code MUSIC (Viallet et al. 2011, 2016; Go rey et al. 2017).
The main motivation was to explore the impact of an artiﬁcial
increase in the stellar luminosity on the properties of convection
and convective penetration. This procedure is a common tactic
adopted in hydrodynamical simulations of convection (Rogers
et al. 2006; Meakin & Arnett 2007; Brun et al. 2011; Hotta 2017;
Edelmann et al. 2019). The experiments of B21 highlight the im-
pact of penetrative downﬂows on the local thermal background
in the overshooting layer. They illustrate how convective down-
ﬂows, when penetrating the region below the convective bound-
ary of the envelope, can induce a local heating and a modiﬁcation
of the temperature gradient as a result of compression and shear
in the overshooting layer. This modiﬁcation of the local back-
ground is connected to a local increase in the radiative ﬂux to
counterbalance the negative enthalpy ﬂux (or heat ﬂux) produced
by penetrating ﬂows. The negative peak of the enthalpy ﬂux
and the positive bump of the radiative ﬂux below the convective
boundary are well-known features described in many numeri-
cal works (Hurlburt et al. 1986; Muthsam et al. 1995; Brummell
et al. 2002; Brun et al. 2011; Hotta 2017; K ¨apyl¨a 2019; Cai
2020). A few works (Rogers et al. 2006; Viallet et al. 2013; Korre
et al. 2019; Higl et al. 2021) have also reported a modiﬁcation
of the local thermal background in the overshooting region, but
without providing a detailed description. The simulations of B21
provide a physical explanation that links the convective penetra-tion process to the local heating and to the radiative bump in the
overshooting layer. The solar-like star simulated in B21 is based
on a model that is not thermally relaxed. It is reasonable to as-
sume that the local heating seen in B21 is present in stars because
the negative heat ﬂux in the overshooting layer and the bump in
the radiative ﬂux that compensates for this feature are persistent.
These two features are also commonly observed in other hydro-
dynamical simulations, as mentioned above. An exploration of
the impact of this heating on stellar evolution models may reveal
that heating is a necessary aspect of models for overshooting.
Fig. 1. Radial proﬁle of the temperature departure T=T0from
the initial proﬁle T0and of the sub-adiabaticity ( r r ad) close to
the convective boundary predicted by 2D hydrodynamical simu-
lations (B21) of solar-like models. The lower panel corresponds
to the model with a realistic stellar luminosity and the upper
panel to a model with luminosity enhanced by a factor of ten.
The dash-dotted red lines show T=T0(in %), the relative dif-
ference between the time and space averages of the temperature,
T, and the initial temperature, T0. The solid blue lines show the
time and space averages of the sub-adiabaticity ( r r ad). The
dashed black lines show the initial proﬁle of the sub-adiabaticity,
(r r ad)init. The convective boundary is indicated by the vertical
solid line (see details in B21)
The behaviour of the thermal proﬁle below the convective
boundary found in the simulations of B21 is illustrated in Fig.
1. It is displayed for the model with a realistic stellar luminosity
(lower panel). We also show the results for a model with an artiﬁ-
cial enhancement in the luminosity by a factor of ten because the
features are intensiﬁed in these ‘boosted’ models (upper panel).
The ﬁgure shows the local heating in the overshooting layer and
its impact on the sub-adiabaticity ( r r ad), withr=d log T
d log Pthe
2
Barae et al.: Local heating due to convective overshooting and the solar modelling problem
temperature gradient and rad=d log T
d log PjSthe adiabatic gradient.
The initial stratiﬁcation below the convective boundary (located
atr=0:6734Rstarfor this speciﬁc stellar model) is set by
the stable radiative gradient, rrad(see the dashed black line be-
low the convective boundary in Fig. 1). B21 show that, as a re-
sult of the local heating below the convective boundary charac-
terised by the bump in temperature di erence T=T0displayed
in Fig. 1, the temperature gradient becomes less sub-adiabatic
immediately below the convective boundary1. The net result is
a smoother transition just below the convective boundary with
a temperature gradient that has an intermediate value between
the radiative temperature gradient and the adiabatic one. In the
next section we analyse the impact of this local heating on 1D
solar structures by adopting a simple prescription that mimics
the behaviour of the temperature gradient suggested by hydro-
dynamical simulations.
3. Impact on one-dimensional solar structure
models
3.1. Helioseismic constraints
Our primary goal in this short paper is to illustrate the potential,
qualitative impact of the local heating produced by overshoot-
ing. We adopted a strategy inspired by the analysis of Buldgen
et al. (2020), who constructed a static structure of the Sun in
agreement with seismic inversions of the Ledoux discriminant
deﬁned by
A=1
 1dlnP
dlnr dln
dlnr; (1)
with  1=(@lnP=@ln)ad. Starting from a reference evolu-
tionary model, Buldgen et al. (2020) used an inversion pro-
cedure to iteratively reconstruct a solar model. Successive in-
versions of the Ledoux discriminant allowed them to obtain a
model-independent proﬁle for this quantity. Their reconstruction
method also gives solar structures that are in excellent agree-
ment with other structural inversions, namely the entropy, S, the
square of the speed of sound, c2
s, and the density, . To illustrate
the convergence of their reconstruction procedure, they show
(right panels of their Figs. 3-6) the successive iterations that con-
verge to an excellent level of agreement for the four structural
inversions ( A,S,c2
s,) starting from the initial reference model
adopted in their work. The di erences found between the recon-
structed model and the reference model are useful as they indi-
cate the modiﬁcations of the reference model that are required to
converge towards a solar model in agreement with helioseismic
data. We recall here the major trends found by Buldgen et al.
(2020) for the four structural quantities, which are used for our
analysis in Sect. 3.2.
The ﬁrst concerns the Ledoux discriminant. The major dis-
crepancy between the Sun and the reference model occurs just
below the convective boundary, with a large positive bump for
the quantity ( ASun-Aref).
The second concerns the speed of sound. The same positive
bump at the same location as for the Ledoux discriminant, A, is
observed for the quantity ( c2
s;Sun c2
s;ref)=c2
s;ref. The corrections
applied to Aduring the reconstruction procedure also reduce the
discrepancy in the speed of sound in the radiative region.
The third concerns the entropy. Large discrepancies are ob-
served in both the radiative region and the convective zone. The
1Less sub-adiabatic means that jr r adjdecreases compared to the
initial proﬁle.entropy discrepancy ( SSun Sref)=Srefhas two positive peaks in
the radiative zone, one just below the overshooting region and a
larger peak deeper at 40% of the stellar radius. This discrep-
ancy is negative in the convective zone. The corrections applied
toAhelp reduce these entropy discrepancies in both regions.
The fourth concerns the density. The quantity ( Sun 
ref)=refhas a negative peak in the radiative region, at 35%
of the stellar radius, and is positive in the convective zone.
Importantly, Buldgen et al. (2020) mention that their recon-
struction procedure gives similar Ledoux discriminant proﬁles
for a wide range of initial reference models. We used these re-
sults to gauge whether the modiﬁcations of the thermal proﬁle
predicted by B21 can help in qualitatively improving all the
structural quantities used by Buldgen et al. (2020).
3.2. Testing one-dimensional solar models
Our main motivation is to show the potential impact of the local
heating described in Sect. 2 on stellar models. We are not aim-
ing in this short work at constructing the best solar model to ﬁt
helioseismic constraints. Using stellar evolution codes, we have
adopted two di erent methods that can be found in the litera-
ture to construct solar models (e.g. Zhang et al. 2012; Vinyoles
et al. 2017). Our ﬁrst method relies on the thermal relaxation
of a reference model with solar radius and luminosity that is
modiﬁed to reproduce the temperature gradient in the overshoot-
ing layer suggested by hydrodynamical simulations. In this case,
the chemical abundances are not modiﬁed by nuclear reactions,
mixing, or microscopic di usion during the relaxation process.
For these tests, we used the 1D Lyon stellar evolution code
(Bara e et al. 1998). We repeated this experiment based on ther-
mal relaxation with the stellar evolution code MONSTAR (e.g.
Constantino et al. 2014) and obtained the same qualitative re-
sults.
The second method considers models that account for the
modiﬁcation of the temperature gradient in the overshooting
layer from the zero age main sequence (ZAMS). The models
are then evolved until they reach the solar radius and luminosity.
With this approach, changes in the chemical abundances from
nuclear reactions, microscopic di usion, and overshooting mix-
ing are also consistent with any modiﬁcation of the structure
induced by the forced local heating in the overshooting layer.
These tests were performed with MONSTAR as it includes the
treatment of microscopic di usion.
The ﬁrst method allows the impact of local heating in
the overshooting layer after thermal relaxation to be isolated.
The second method provides evolutionary models that are self-
consistent since the e ect of the modiﬁcation of the temperature
gradient is accounted for during their evolution on the main se-
quence.
In the following, we adopt a modiﬁcation of the local temper-
ature gradient in the overshooting layer that qualitatively repro-
duces the behaviour displayed in Fig. 1. We deﬁne an overshoot-
ing length dov=ovHP;CB, with HP;CBthe pressure scale height
at the convective boundary and ova free parameter. We also de-
ﬁne two radial locations, rov=rCB dovandrmid=rCB dov=2,
with rCBthe radial location of the convective boundary. The tem-
perature gradient is modiﬁed as follows. For rmidr<rCB, we
use
r=g(r)rad+(1 g(r))rrad; (2)
with
g(r)=sinf[(r rmid)=(rCB rmid)]a=2g: (3)
3
Barae et al.: Local heating due to convective overshooting and the solar modelling problem
Forrovr<rmid, we use
r=rrad h(r)rad; (4)
with
h(r)=bsinf[(rmid r)=(rmid rov)]g: (5)
Sine functions are used in Eqs. (3) and (5) to reproduce the
smooth variations in the temperature gradient below the convec-
tive boundary produced by the hydrodynamical simulations. We
have veriﬁed that the results are insensitive to the smoothness of
these variations and to the exact shape of the temperature gra-
dient radial proﬁle.We adopted a=0.3 in Eq. (3) as it provides a
behaviour for the temperature gradient very close to the one dis-
played in Fig. 1. Results are rather insensitive to variations in the
values of abetween 0.2 and 0.4. We adopted b=0.03 in Eq. (5),
which also provides a close visual match to the hydrodynamical
results, but we note that the results are insensitive to the value of
b.
3.2.1. Thermal equilibrium models
The details of the procedure for the ﬁrst method are the follow-
ing. We calculate the evolution of a 1 Mmodel with an initial
helium mass fraction of 0.28, metallicity Z=0:02;and a mix-
ing length lmix=1:9HP. We use a reference model that is in
thermal equilibrium2and has the luminosity and radius of the
current Sun. Starting from this reference model, the tempera-
ture gradient is modiﬁed over a prescribed depth to mimic the
impact of overshooting according to the hydrodynamical sim-
ulations described in Sect. 2. We adopt the prescription given
by Eqs. (2)-(5) over a distance dovbelow the convective bound-
ary. We show the results in Fig. 2 for ov=0.15 andov=0.20.
These overshooting widths are in good agreement with the maxi-
mal depth reached by downﬂows below the convective boundary
predicted by the hydrodynamical simulations for the solar-like
model investigated in B21. We note that the stellar model used
in B21 is slightly under-luminous compared to the Sun (see B21
for details). B21 also mention that one should be cautious when
directly applying the overshooting depths predicted by their sim-
ulations to real stars since the ﬁnal relaxed state for these simula-
tions may have di erent properties from non-thermally relaxed
states. We varied ovbetween 0.15 and 0.35 and ﬁnd that the
results do not change qualitatively. However, the amplitude of
the variations in the model properties depends on dov(see be-
low). As shown below, this simple prescription implemented in
a stellar evolution code yields a local increase in the tempera-
ture below the convective boundary, similar to that observed in
the hydrodynamical simulations. We stress that Eqs. (2)-(5) have
been chosen for simplicity. They are only a rough approximation
that can mimic the thermal proﬁle behaviour suggested in the 2D
simulations.
The model with a modiﬁed temperature gradient is then ther-
mally relaxed, that is to say, it is evolved over many thermal
timescales without any modiﬁcation of the abundances from nu-
clear reactions until thermal equilibrium is reached. The temper-
ature gradient is modiﬁed in the overshooting layer during the
whole relaxation process, and this is referred to as a ‘forced local
heating’. This procedure ensures that the model with a modiﬁed
temperature gradient can be consistently compared to the refer-
ence model. As shown in Fig. 2, the simple prescription given
2Thermal equilibrium means that the total nuclear energy produced
in the central regions balances the radiative losses at the surface, i.e.the
total nuclear luminosity, Lnuc, equals the total stellar luminosity, L.by Eqs. (2)-(5) yields similar qualitative changes in the temper-
ature and the sub-adiabaticity close to the convective boundary
that was found in the hydrodynamical simulations of B21.
Fig. 2. Radial proﬁle of the temperature di erence and of the
sub-adiabaticity of a 1D solar-like structure with a modiﬁed tem-
perature gradient in the overshooting layer according to Eqs.
(2)-(5). The temperature gradient is modiﬁed over a distance
dov=ovHP;CB, withov=0.15 in the lower panel and ov=0.20
in the upper panel. The dash-dotted red lines show the percent-
age relative temperature di erence, T=Tref, with T=T Tref.
The solid blue lines correspond to the sub-adiabaticity ( r r ad).
The dashed black lines show the sub-adiabaticity of the refer-
ence model. The convective boundary is indicated by the vertical
solid line. The vertical dashed line in each panel is located at a
distance dovbelow the convective boundary.
The impact on the whole stellar structure was quantiﬁed by
comparing the four structural quantities ( A,S,c2
s,) between the
modiﬁed and the reference model. The results are displayed in
Fig. 3, with Xdeﬁned as ( X Xref) for any structural quantity X.
The forced local heating in the overshooting layer produces sim-
ilar positive peaks for A,S, and c2
s, as found for the temper-
ature. The modiﬁcation thus provides the correction required to
improve the discrepancy for the Ledoux discriminant described
in the ﬁrst of the trends outlined in Sect. 3.1. Unsurprisingly,
such a modiﬁcation of the temperature gradient is expected to
improve the agreement with helioseismic constraints and help
4
Barae et al.: Local heating due to convective overshooting and the solar modelling problem
remove the sound speed anomaly below the convective bound-
ary (second trend in Sect. 3.1), as suggested by the results of
Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. (2011). But it is also interesting to
note that such a modiﬁcation yields a slight cooling of the con-
vective zone (see Fig. 2) and thus a negative di erence for the
entropy (see Fig. 3). A negative di erence in the convective en-
velope is in agreement with the correction required for the ref-
erence model of Buldgen et al. (2020) to better match the Sun
(see third trend in Sect. 3.1). Regarding the density, the modiﬁ-
cation of the temperature gradient has an interesting impact in
the radiative zone, with a large decrease in the density compared
to the reference model over a broad region below the convective
boundary. The impact on the density in the convective region for
this speciﬁc model is partly in agreement with the correction re-
quired for this quantity in the Buldgen et al. (2020) study, with a
positive di erence found only in the upper part of the convective
envelope (see the fourth trend in Sect. 3.1).
These trends are insensitive to the depth over which the tem-
perature gradient is modiﬁed. Increasing the depth increases the
magnitude of the di erences but has no impact on their sign. We
ﬁnd that the maximum variation in the model properties, such as
the speed of sound, c2
s=c2
s;ref, roughly scales with d2
ov. This scal-
ing is linked to the integrated area between the modiﬁed temper-
ature gradient curve and the one for the reference (non-modiﬁed)
temperature gradient, which roughly decreases linearly with r.
This area is proportional to the square of the overshooting depth,
and consequently, the maximum variation in the model proper-
ties is also proportional to d2
ov. The qualitative trends also remain
the same whether overshooting mixing in the reference model
is ignored or included using a step function (with instantaneous
mixing) or an exponential decay for the di usion coe cient (e.g.
Freytag et al. 1996).
3.2.2. Self-consistent evolutionary models
For the tests based on the second method, we ran di erent sets
of models with di erent combinations of assumptions, including
or not microscopic di usion and with or without overshooting
mixing. When overshooting mixing was included in the over-
shooting layer, it was based either on a step function or on an
exponential decay for the di usion coe cient. Microscopic dif-
fusion for H and He was implemented according to Thoul et al.
(1994). For these tests, the temperature gradient was modiﬁed
according to Eqs. (2)-(5). All models start from the ZAMS and
are evolved until they reach the solar radius and luminosity at the
same age. This was achieved by making small adjustments to the
mixing length, lmix. The models with temperature gradient mod-
iﬁcations were compared to the relevant reference model, which
has no modiﬁcation of the temperature gradient but everything
else is the same (i.e. the same treatment of microscopic di u-
sion and of overshooting mixing). The evolutionary models with
temperature gradient modiﬁcations are thus self-consistent. The
main di erence between this approach and the one in the previ-
ous section is that these models accumulate small di erences in,
for example, central H abundance when compared to their ref-
erence model. These tests produce the same trends in the over-
shooting layer as found for the tests based on the ﬁrst method
(Sect. 3.2.1), independently of the treatment of overshooting
mixing and whether microscopic di usion is included or not.
In the convective zone, all models give a positive di erence for
the density between the model with a modiﬁed temperature gra-
dient and the relevant reference model. For the other quantities
(S,c2
s), the di erences in the convective zone are very sensitive
Fig. 3. Dierence of various structural quantities between a
model with a modiﬁed temperature gradient in the overshoot-
ing layer and a reference model calculated with the Lyon stellar
evolution code. The temperature gradient in the modiﬁed model
is changed over a distance dov=ovHP;CBbelow the convec-
tive boundary (indicated by the vertical solid line). The lower
panel shows the results for ov=0:15 and the upper panel for
ov=0:20.
to the assumptions regarding whether overshooting mixing is in-
cluded or not. But at least we ﬁnd solutions that are compatible
with the four trends found by Buldgen et al. (2020) for the four
structural quantities. This is illustrated in Fig. 4 with a model
that accounts for step function overshooting mixing over a dis-
tance dov=0:15HP;CB(lower panel) and dov=0:20HP;CB(upper
panel).
4. Conclusion
The tests performed in Sect. 3 are based on di erent methods
(relaxed models versus consistent evolution) that can be used to
construct solar models. Independently of the method used, the
tests show that a local increase in the temperature in the over-
shooting region due to convective penetration provides the quali-
tative e ects required to improve the speed of sound discrepancy
below the convective boundary. This discrepancy is persistent in
5
Barae et al.: Local heating due to convective overshooting and the solar modelling problem
Fig. 4. Dierence of various structural quantities between a
modiﬁed model and a reference model calculated with the
MONSTAR stellar evolution code. The reference model is
evolved from the ZAMS with microscopic di usion and step
function overshooting mixing over a distance dov=ovHP;CBbe-
low the convective boundary. The lower panel shows the results
forov=0:15 and the upper panel for ov=0:20. The models
with a modiﬁed temperature gradient in the overshooting layer
(same microscopic di usion and overshooting mixing treatment
as the reference model) are evolved similarly from the ZAMS.
The convective boundary is indicated by the vertical solid line.
solar models that use low solar metal abundances. This is not
surprising because an increase in the temperature in this spe-
ciﬁc region has previously been invoked in the literature to solve
this problem, as mentioned in Sect. 1. However, the details of
the physical process responsible for this local heating have been
lacking, whereas we can now suggest an explanation based on
the B21 results. The trends that we ﬁnd for the four structural
quantities ( A,S,c2
s,) are robust below the convective bound-
ary and in a large fraction of the radiative core, independently of
the treatment of mixing and di usion and of the method for con-
structing the models in Sects. 3.2.1 and 3.2.2. Our experiments
additionally show that such a local change in the temperature,
despite being made over a very limited region below the convec-
tive boundary, can also a ect the density, the entropy, and thespeed of sound in the convective envelope after thermal relax-
ation or evolution on the main sequence. How these quantities
are aected in the convective envelope compared to a reference
model with no local heating depends on the strategy for building
solar models and on the treatment of overshooting mixing. This
mixing is obviously linked to the local heating given that both
result from the same dynamical process. A combined testing of
both e ects in stellar models could provide more constraints on
the general process of overshooting.
Increasingly, e orts are now devoted to characterising the
process of convective boundary mixing in stellar models based
on multi-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations. More work
is required to obtain reliable determinations of an overshooting
depth and to describe quantitatively the mixing and impact on
the temperature gradient. Understanding the e ects of rotation
and magnetic ﬁelds on overshooting is a signiﬁcantly more dif-
ﬁcult theoretical and numerical problem to address; however,
eorts to study these combined non-linear e ects are ongoing
(Hotta 2017; Korre et al. 2021). Despite the limitations of ex-
isting hydrodynamical simulations, they are already providing
constraints on physical processes usually treated with several
free parameters in 1D stellar evolution models. They can thus
limit the degrees of freedom in a problem as complex as so-
lar modelling. Our primary goal in this work is to highlight the
potential impact of convective penetration on the thermal back-
ground in the overshooting region. The processes studied in B21
that produce a local change in the temperature gradient are also
responsible for the mixing in this region. Because much observa-
tional evidence points towards the need for extra mixing at con-
vective boundaries, for example lithium depletion in solar-like
stars (Bara e et al. 2017), the size of convective cores (Claret
& Torres 2016), and colour-magnitude diagrams (Castro et al.
2014), solar modellers often include this extra mixing in their
models. But a consistent approach should also require account-
ing for a local change in the temperature gradient. The impact of
this local heating goes in the right direction to improve not only
the discrepancies of solar models below the convective bound-
ary, but also in the convective envelope. This e ect oers an in-
teresting step forward for solving the solar modelling problem.
In this exploratory work, we adopt a simple prescription for the
local heating in the overshooting layer since the main goal is
to highlight its qualitative impact on stellar models. However,
this e ect should not be considered as another free parameter in
the solar modelling problem. Future multi-dimensional hydro-
dynamical simulations will enable this process, and its treatment
in 1D stellar evolution codes, to be better constrained.
5. Acknowledgements
We thank our anonymous referee for valuable comments which
helped improving the manuscript. This work is supported by the
ERC grant No. 787361-COBOM and the consolidated STFC
grant ST /R000395 /1. IB thanks the Max Planck Institut f ¨ur
Astrophysics (Garching) for warm hospitality during completion
of part of this work. The authors would like to acknowledge the
use of the University of Exeter High-Performance Computing
(HPC) facility ISCA and of the DiRAC Data Intensive service
at Leicester, operated by the University of Leicester IT Services,
which forms part of the STFC DiRAC HPC Facility. The equip-
ment was funded by BEIS capital funding via STFC capital
grants ST /K000373 /1 and ST /R002363 /1 and STFC DiRAC
Operations grant ST /R001014 /1. DiRAC is part of the National
e-Infrastructure.
6
Barae et al.: Local heating due to convective overshooting and the solar modelling problem
References
Anders, E. & Grevesse, N. 1989, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 53, 197
Asplund, M., Amarsi, A. M., & Grevesse, N. 2021, A&A, 653, A141
Asplund, M., Grevesse, N., Sauval, A. J., & Scott, P. 2009, ARA&A, 47, 481
Barae, I., Chabrier, G., Allard, F., & Hauschildt, P. H. 1998, A&A, 337, 403
Barae, I., Pratt, J., Go rey, T., et al. 2017, ApJ, 845, L6
Barae, I., Pratt, J., Vlaykov, D. G., et al. 2021, A&A, 654, A126
Brummell, N. H., Clune, T. L., & Toomre, J. 2002, ApJ, 570, 825
Brun, A. S., Miesch, M. S., & Toomre, J. 2011, ApJ, 742, 79
Buldgen, G., Eggenberger, P., Baturin, V . A., et al. 2020, A&A, 642, A36
Buldgen, G., Salmon, S., & Noels, A. 2019a, Frontiers in Astronomy and Space
Sciences, 6, 42
Buldgen, G., Salmon, S. J. A. J., Noels, A., et al. 2019b, A&A, 621, A33
Caau, E., Ludwig, H. G., Ste en, M., Freytag, B., & Bonifacio, P. 2011,
Sol. Phys., 268, 255
Cai, T. 2020, ApJ, 888, 46
Castro, N., Fossati, L., Langer, N., et al. 2014, A&A, 570, L13
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J. 2021, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 18, 2
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Gough, D. O., & Knudstrup, E. 2018, MNRAS, 477,
3845
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Monteiro, M. J. P. F. G., Rempel, M., & Thompson,
M. J. 2011, MNRAS, 414, 1158
Claret, A. & Torres, G. 2016, A&A, 592, A15
Constantino, T., Campbell, S., Gil-Pons, P., & Lattanzio, J. 2014, ApJ, 784, 56
Edelmann, P. V . F., Ratnasingam, R. P., Pedersen, M. G., et al. 2019, ApJ, 876, 4
Freytag, B., Ludwig, H. G., & Ste en, M. 1996, A&A, 313, 497
Gorey, T., Pratt, J., Viallet, M., et al. 2017, A&A, 600, A7
Grevesse, N. & Noels, A. 1993, in Origin and Evolution of the Elements, ed.
N. Prantzos, E. Vangioni-Flam, & M. Casse, 15–25
Higl, J., M ¨uller, E., & Weiss, A. 2021, A&A, 646, A133
Hotta, H. 2017, ApJ, 843, 52
Hurlburt, N. E., Toomre, J., & Massaguer, J. M. 1986, ApJ, 311, 563
K¨apyl¨a, P. J. 2019, A&A, 631, A122
Korre, L., Brummell, N., Garaud, P., & Guervilly, C. 2021, MNRAS, 503, 362
Korre, L., Garaud, P., & Brummell, N. H. 2019, MNRAS, 484, 1220
Kunitomo, M. & Guillot, T. 2021, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2109.06492
Meakin, C. A. & Arnett, D. 2007, ApJ, 667, 448
Muthsam, H. J., Goeb, W., Kupka, F., Liebich, W., & Zoechling, J. 1995, A&A,
293, 127
Rogers, T. M., Glatzmaier, G. A., & Jones, C. A. 2006, ApJ, 653, 765
Thoul, A. A., Bahcall, J. N., & Loeb, A. 1994, ApJ, 421, 828
Viallet, M., Bara e, I., & Walder, R. 2011, A&A, 531, A86
Viallet, M., Go rey, T., Bara e, I., et al. 2016, A&A, 586, A153
Viallet, M., Meakin, C., Arnett, D., & Moc ´ak, M. 2013, ApJ, 769, 1
Vinyoles, N., Serenelli, A. M., Villante, F. L., et al. 2017, ApJ, 835, 202
Zahn, J. P. 1991, A&A, 252, 179
Zhang, C., Deng, L., Xiong, D., & Christensen-Dalsgaard, J. 2012, ApJ, 759,
L14
Zhang, Q. S. & Li, Y . 2012, ApJ, 746, 50
Zhang, Q.-S., Li, Y ., & Christensen-Dalsgaard, J. 2019, ApJ, 881, 103
7
