Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. solar˙model˙v10˙corrected © ESO 2022
January 4, 2022

arXiv:2201.00200v1 [astro-ph.SR] 1 Jan 2022

Local heating due to convective overshooting and the solar
modelling problem

I. Baraffe1,2, T. Constantino1, J. Clarke1, A. Le Saux1,2, T. Goffrey4, T. Guillet1, J. Pratt3, D. G. Vlaykov1

1 University of Exeter, Physics and Astronomy, EX4 4QL Exeter, UK (e-mail: i.baraffe@ex.ac.uk)
2 École Normale Supérieure, Lyon, CRAL (UMR CNRS 5574), Université de Lyon, France
3 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Georgia State University, Atlanta GA 30303, USA
4 Centre for Fusion, Space and Astrophysics, Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK

ABSTRACT

Recent hydrodynamical simulations of convection in a solar-like model suggest that penetrative convective flows at the boundary
of the convective envelope modify the thermal background in the overshooting layer. Based on these results, we implement in one-dimensional
stellar evolution codes a simple prescription to modify the temperature gradient below the convective boundary of a
solar model. This simple prescription qualitatively reproduces the behaviour found in the hydrodynamical simulations, namely a
local heating and smoothing of the temperature gradient below the convective boundary. We show that introducing local heating in
the overshooting layer can reduce the sound-speed discrepancy usually reported between solar models and the structure of the Sun
inferred from helioseismology. It also affects key quantities in the convective envelope, such as the density, the entropy, and the
speed of sound. These effects could help reduce the discrepancies between solar models and observed constraints based on seismic
inversions of the Ledoux discriminant. Since mixing due to overshooting and local heating are the result of the same convective
penetration process, the goal of this work is to invite solar modellers to consider both processes for a more consistent approach.

Key words. Convection – Hydrodynamics – Stars: evolution – Sun: evolution - helioseismology - interior

1. Introduction

Modelling the internal structure of the Sun is still a challenge.
A recent review by Christensen-Dalsgaard (2021) describes in
detail the long-standing efforts to improve solar models. The solar
modelling problem refers to the discrepancy between helio-seismology
and solar interior models that adopt low metallicities
predicted by the three-dimensional (3D) atmosphere models
of, for example, Asplund et al. (2009) and Caffau et al. (2011),
in contrast to the high metallicities based on previous literature
compilations by, for example, Anders & Grevesse (1989)
and Grevesse & Noels (1993). Asplund et al. (2021) have recently
confirmed with state-of-the-art 3D simulations the relatively
low metal abundances for the Sun. Asplund et al. (2021)
consider that their study yields the most reliable solar abundances
available today, suggesting that the solar modelling problem
is no longer a problem of abundances but rather a problem
of stellar physics. The treatment of mixing below the convective
zone is one of the key processes that could improve solar models.
Several studies indeed reveal that the process of convective
penetration, also called overshooting, at the bottom of the convective
envelope could play an important role in improving the
agreement between solar models and helioseismic constraints
(see for example Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. 2011; Zhang et al.
2012; Buldgen et al. 2019b). Overshooting in solar models has
most often been treated using diffusive or instantaneous chemical
mixing. A temperature gradient that sharply transitions from
a nearly adiabatic form to a radiative form is usually assumed,
as suggested by the theoretical work of Zahn (1991). Models
with a smoother transition have also been investigated. Based
on the analysis of models with different stratifications near the

Send offprint requests to: I. Baraffe

base of the convective zone, Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. (2011)
found that models that better fit the helioseismic data have a
weakly sub-adiabatic temperature gradient in the lower part of
the convective zone and a smooth transition to the radiative gradient
in the overshooting layer. But Christensen-Dalsgaard et al.
(2011) noted that the required temperature stratification is difficult
to reconcile with existing overshooting models and numerical
simulations. They concluded that only non-local turbulent
convection models could produce the desired degree of smoothness
in the transition (see for example Zhang & Li 2012; Zhang
et al. 2012). But these non-local models remain uncertain, and
their description of overshooting under the conditions found at
the base of the solar convective zone is yet to be validated.
Zhang et al. (2019) explored the impact of overshooting by
introducing a parametrised turbulent kinetic energy flux based
on a model with parameters that are adjusted to improve the
helioseismic properties. They suggest that amelioration can be
obtained specifically below the convective envelope. However,
Zhang et al. (2019) find that this model cannot solve the whole
solar problem because such a flux worsens the sound-speed profile
in the deep radiative interior of their solar model. Given the
uncertainties regarding the temperature stratification of the overshooting
region, solar modellers have considered these effects as
secondary and have focused their efforts on exploring the impact
of solar abundances, microphysics (opacities, equations of state,
nuclear reaction rates), and chemical mixing and diffusion (see
details and references in the review of Buldgen et al. 2019a).
Additional, more exotic effects such as early disk accretion or
solar-wind mass loss (Zhang et al. 2019; Kunitomo & Guillot
2021) are also attracting increasing attention.

To reinvigorate the debate, Buldgen et al. (2019b) recently
highlighted once again how the transition of the temperature gradient
just below the convective envelope can significantly impact
the disagreement between solar models and helioseismic constraints.
Their results, based on a method that combines multiple
structural inversions, suggest that the transition in temperature
gradient is improperly reproduced by adopting either an
adiabatic or a radiative temperature gradient in the overshooting
layer. The solution should be somewhere in between these
two extremes. Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. (2018) also note that
an increase in the temperature at the transition would remove
a remaining small sharp dip in the speed of sound immediately
beneath the convective zone of the model. A major difficulty is
to disentangle the effects of overshoot from the effects of opacities,
which can also alter the temperature gradient in these layers.
Given the large number of parameters to deal with in order to improve
solar models and the current lack of strong arguments in
favour of modifying the thermal stratification in the overshooting
layer, there has been no real motivation to deviate from the
traditional picture of a sharp transition as formalised by Zahn
(1991).

The present work is motivated by arguments inspired by hydrodynamical
simulations of convection and convective penetration
in solar-like models. Recent hydrodynamical simulations by
Baraffe et al. (2021, hereafter B21) highlight the process of local
heating in the overshooting region due to penetrating convective
motions across the convective boundary. In the following, we
analyse the potential impact of this feature on one-dimensional
(1D) stellar evolution structures in the context of solar models.
The hydrodynamical results of B21 are briefly summarised in
Sect. 2, and their impact on 1D models are analysed in Sect. 3
and discussed in Sect. 4.

2. Modification of the thermal background in the
overshooting layer: Results from
two-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations

B21 performed two-dimensional (2D) fully compressible time-implicit
simulations of convection and convective penetration in
a solar-like model with the MUlti-dimensional Stellar Implicit
Code MUSIC (Viallet et al. 2011, 2016; Goffrey et al. 2017).
The main motivation was to explore the impact of an artificial
increase in the stellar luminosity on the properties of convection
and convective penetration. This procedure is a common tactic
adopted in hydrodynamical simulations of convection (Rogers
et al. 2006; Meakin & Arnett 2007; Brun et al. 2011; Hotta 2017;
Edelmann et al. 2019). The experiments of B21 highlight the impact
of penetrative downflows on the local thermal background
in the overshooting layer. They illustrate how convective downflows,
when penetrating the region below the convective boundary
of the envelope, can induce a local heating and a modification
of the temperature gradient as a result of compression and shear
in the overshooting layer. This modification of the local background
is connected to a local increase in the radiative flux to
counterbalance the negative enthalpy flux (or heat flux) produced
by penetrating flows. The negative peak of the enthalpy flux
and the positive bump of the radiative flux below the convective
boundary are well-known features described in many numerical
works (Hurlburt et al. 1986; Muthsam et al. 1995; Brummell
et al. 2002; Brun et al. 2011; Hotta 2017; Käpylä 2019; Cai
2020). A few works (Rogers et al. 2006; Viallet et al. 2013; Korre
et al. 2019; Higl et al. 2021) have also reported a modification
of the local thermal background in the overshooting region, but
without providing a detailed description. The simulations of B21
provide a physical explanation that links the convective penetration
process to the local heating and to the radiative bump in the
overshooting layer. The solar-like star simulated in B21 is based
on a model that is not thermally relaxed. It is reasonable to assume
that the local heating seen in B21 is present in stars because
the negative heat flux in the overshooting layer and the bump in
the radiative flux that compensates for this feature are persistent.
These two features are also commonly observed in other hydrodynamical
simulations, as mentioned above. An exploration of
the impact of this heating on stellar evolution models may reveal
that heating is a necessary aspect of models for overshooting.

Fig. 1. Radial profile of the temperature departure ∆T/T0 from
the initial profile T0 and of the sub-adiabaticity (∇−∇ad) close to
the convective boundary predicted by 2D hydrodynamical simulations
(B21) of solar-like models. The lower panel corresponds
to the model with a realistic stellar luminosity and the upper
panel to a model with luminosity enhanced by a factor of ten.
The dash-dotted red lines show ∆T/T0 (in %), the relative difference
between the time and space averages of the temperature,
T , and the initial temperature, T0. The solid blue lines show the
time and space averages of the sub-adiabaticity (∇ − ∇ad). The
dashed black lines show the initial profile of the sub-adiabaticity,
(∇−∇ad)init. The convective boundary is indicated by the vertical
solid line (see details in B21)

The behaviour of the thermal profile below the convective
boundary found in the simulations of B21 is illustrated in Fig.
1. It is displayed for the model with a realistic stellar luminosity
(lower panel). We also show the results for a model with an artificial
enhancement in the luminosity by a factor of ten because the
features are intensified in these ‘boosted’ models (upper panel).
The figure shows the local heating in the overshooting layer and
its impact on the sub-adiabaticity (∇ − ∇ad), with ∇ =

d log T
d log P the

temperature gradient and ∇ad =
d log T
d log P |S the adiabatic gradient.

The initial stratification below the convective boundary (located
at r = 0.6734 × Rstar for this specific stellar model) is set by
the stable radiative gradient, ∇rad (see the dashed black line below
the convective boundary in Fig. 1). B21 show that, as a result
of the local heating below the convective boundary characterised
by the bump in temperature difference ∆T/T0 displayed
in Fig. 1, the temperature gradient becomes less sub-adiabatic
immediately below the convective boundary1. The net result is
a smoother transition just below the convective boundary with
a temperature gradient that has an intermediate value between
the radiative temperature gradient and the adiabatic one. In the
next section we analyse the impact of this local heating on 1D
solar structures by adopting a simple prescription that mimics
the behaviour of the temperature gradient suggested by hydrodynamical
simulations.

3. Impact on one-dimensional solar structure
models

3.1. Helioseismic constraints

Our primary goal in this short paper is to illustrate the potential,
qualitative impact of the local heating produced by overshooting.
We adopted a strategy inspired by the analysis of Buldgen
et al. (2020), who constructed a static structure of the Sun in
agreement with seismic inversions of the Ledoux discriminant
defined by

A =
1
Γ1

d ln P
d ln r

−
d ln ρ
d ln r

, (1)

with Γ1 = (∂ ln P/∂ ln ρ)ad. Starting from a reference evolutionary
model, Buldgen et al. (2020) used an inversion procedure
to iteratively reconstruct a solar model. Successive inversions
of the Ledoux discriminant allowed them to obtain a
model-independent profile for this quantity. Their reconstruction
method also gives solar structures that are in excellent agreement
with other structural inversions, namely the entropy, S , the
square of the speed of sound, c2s , and the density, ρ. To illustrate
the convergence of their reconstruction procedure, they show
(right panels of their Figs. 3-6) the successive iterations that converge
to an excellent level of agreement for the four structural
inversions (A, S , c2s , ρ) starting from the initial reference model
adopted in their work. The differences found between the reconstructed
model and the reference model are useful as they indicate
the modifications of the reference model that are required to
converge towards a solar model in agreement with helioseismic
data. We recall here the major trends found by Buldgen et al.
(2020) for the four structural quantities, which are used for our
analysis in Sect. 3.2.

The first concerns the Ledoux discriminant. The major discrepancy
between the Sun and the reference model occurs just
below the convective boundary, with a large positive bump for
the quantity (ASun - Aref).

The second concerns the speed of sound. The same positive
bump at the same location as for the Ledoux discriminant, A, is
observed for the quantity (c2s,Sun − c

2
s,ref)/c

2
s,ref . The corrections

applied to A during the reconstruction procedure also reduce the
discrepancy in the speed of sound in the radiative region.

The third concerns the entropy. Large discrepancies are observed
in both the radiative region and the convective zone. The

1 Less sub-adiabatic means that |∇ − ∇ad| decreases compared to the
initial profile.

entropy discrepancy (S Sun − S ref)/S ref has two positive peaks in
the radiative zone, one just below the overshooting region and a
larger peak deeper at ∼ 40% of the stellar radius. This discrepancy
is negative in the convective zone. The corrections applied
to A help reduce these entropy discrepancies in both regions.

The fourth concerns the density. The quantity (ρSun −
ρref)/ρref has a negative peak in the radiative region, at ∼ 35%
of the stellar radius, and is positive in the convective zone.

Importantly, Buldgen et al. (2020) mention that their reconstruction
procedure gives similar Ledoux discriminant profiles
for a wide range of initial reference models. We used these results
to gauge whether the modifications of the thermal profile
predicted by B21 can help in qualitatively improving all the
structural quantities used by Buldgen et al. (2020).

3.2. Testing one-dimensional solar models

Our main motivation is to show the potential impact of the local
heating described in Sect. 2 on stellar models. We are not aiming
in this short work at constructing the best solar model to fit
helioseismic constraints. Using stellar evolution codes, we have
adopted two different methods that can be found in the literature
to construct solar models (e.g. Zhang et al. 2012; Vinyoles
et al. 2017). Our first method relies on the thermal relaxation
of a reference model with solar radius and luminosity that is
modified to reproduce the temperature gradient in the overshooting
layer suggested by hydrodynamical simulations. In this case,
the chemical abundances are not modified by nuclear reactions,
mixing, or microscopic diffusion during the relaxation process.
For these tests, we used the 1D Lyon stellar evolution code
(Baraffe et al. 1998). We repeated this experiment based on thermal
relaxation with the stellar evolution code MONSTAR (e.g.
Constantino et al. 2014) and obtained the same qualitative results.

The second method considers models that account for the
modification of the temperature gradient in the overshooting
layer from the zero age main sequence (ZAMS). The models
are then evolved until they reach the solar radius and luminosity.
With this approach, changes in the chemical abundances from
nuclear reactions, microscopic diffusion, and overshooting mixing
are also consistent with any modification of the structure
induced by the forced local heating in the overshooting layer.
These tests were performed with MONSTAR as it includes the
treatment of microscopic diffusion.

The first method allows the impact of local heating in
the overshooting layer after thermal relaxation to be isolated.
The second method provides evolutionary models that are selfconsistent
since the effect of the modification of the temperature
gradient is accounted for during their evolution on the main sequence.

In the following, we adopt a modification of the local temperature
gradient in the overshooting layer that qualitatively reproduces
the behaviour displayed in Fig. 1. We define an overshooting
length dov = αovHP,CB, with HP,CB the pressure scale height
at the convective boundary and αov a free parameter. We also define
two radial locations, rov = rCB − dov and rmid = rCB − dov/2,
with rCB the radial location of the convective boundary. The temperature
gradient is modified as follows. For rmid ≤ r < rCB, we
use

∇ = g(r)∇ad + (1 − g(r))∇rad, (2)

with

g(r) = sin{[(r − rmid)/(rCB − rmid)]a × π/2}. (3)


For rov ≤ r < rmid, we use

∇ = ∇rad − h(r)∇ad, (4)

with

h(r) = b × sin{[(rmid − r)/(rmid − rov)] × π}. (5)

Sine functions are used in Eqs. (3) and (5) to reproduce the
smooth variations in the temperature gradient below the convective
boundary produced by the hydrodynamical simulations. We
have verified that the results are insensitive to the smoothness of
these variations and to the exact shape of the temperature gradient
radial profile.We adopted a=0.3 in Eq. (3) as it provides a
behaviour for the temperature gradient very close to the one displayed
in Fig. 1. Results are rather insensitive to variations in the
values of a between 0.2 and 0.4. We adopted b=0.03 in Eq. (5),
which also provides a close visual match to the hydrodynamical
results, but we note that the results are insensitive to the value of
b.

3.2.1. Thermal equilibrium models

The details of the procedure for the first method are the following.
We calculate the evolution of a 1 M⊙ model with an initial
helium mass fraction of 0.28, metallicity Z = 0.02, and a mixing
length lmix = 1.9HP. We use a reference model that is in
thermal equilibrium2 and has the luminosity and radius of the
current Sun. Starting from this reference model, the temperature
gradient is modified over a prescribed depth to mimic the
impact of overshooting according to the hydrodynamical simulations
described in Sect. 2. We adopt the prescription given
by Eqs. (2)-(5) over a distance dov below the convective boundary.
We show the results in Fig. 2 for αov = 0.15 and αov= 0.20.
These overshooting widths are in good agreement with the maximal
depth reached by downflows below the convective boundary
predicted by the hydrodynamical simulations for the solar-like
model investigated in B21. We note that the stellar model used
in B21 is slightly under-luminous compared to the Sun (see B21
for details). B21 also mention that one should be cautious when
directly applying the overshooting depths predicted by their simulations
to real stars since the final relaxed state for these simulations
may have different properties from non-thermally relaxed
states. We varied αov between 0.15 and 0.35 and find that the
results do not change qualitatively. However, the amplitude of
the variations in the model properties depends on dov (see below).
As shown below, this simple prescription implemented in
a stellar evolution code yields a local increase in the temperature
below the convective boundary, similar to that observed in
the hydrodynamical simulations. We stress that Eqs. (2)-(5) have
been chosen for simplicity. They are only a rough approximation
that can mimic the thermal profile behaviour suggested in the 2D
simulations.

The model with a modified temperature gradient is then thermally
relaxed, that is to say, it is evolved over many thermal
timescales without any modification of the abundances from nuclear
reactions until thermal equilibrium is reached. The temperature
gradient is modified in the overshooting layer during the
whole relaxation process, and this is referred to as a ‘forced local
heating’. This procedure ensures that the model with a modified
temperature gradient can be consistently compared to the reference
model. As shown in Fig. 2, the simple prescription given

2 Thermal equilibrium means that the total nuclear energy produced
in the central regions balances the radiative losses at the surface, i.e. the
total nuclear luminosity, Lnuc, equals the total stellar luminosity, L.

by Eqs. (2)-(5) yields similar qualitative changes in the temperature
and the sub-adiabaticity close to the convective boundary
that was found in the hydrodynamical simulations of B21.

Fig. 2. Radial profile of the temperature difference and of the
sub-adiabaticity of a 1D solar-like structure with a modified temperature
gradient in the overshooting layer according to Eqs.
(2)-(5). The temperature gradient is modified over a distance
dov = αovHP,CB, with αov=0.15 in the lower panel and αov=0.20
in the upper panel. The dash-dotted red lines show the percentage
relative temperature difference, ∆T/Tref , with ∆T = T −Tref .
The solid blue lines correspond to the sub-adiabaticity (∇−∇ad).
The dashed black lines show the sub-adiabaticity of the reference
model. The convective boundary is indicated by the vertical
solid line. The vertical dashed line in each panel is located at a
distance dov below the convective boundary.

The impact on the whole stellar structure was quantified by
comparing the four structural quantities (A, S , c2s , ρ) between the
modified and the reference model. The results are displayed in
Fig. 3, with ∆X defined as (X−Xref) for any structural quantity X.
The forced local heating in the overshooting layer produces similar
positive peaks for ∆A, ∆S , and ∆c2s , as found for the temperature.
The modification thus provides the correction required to
improve the discrepancy for the Ledoux discriminant described
in the first of the trends outlined in Sect. 3.1. Unsurprisingly,
such a modification of the temperature gradient is expected to
improve the agreement with helioseismic constraints and help
remove the sound speed anomaly below the convective boundary
(second trend in Sect. 3.1), as suggested by the results of
Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. (2011). But it is also interesting to
note that such a modification yields a slight cooling of the convective
zone (see Fig. 2) and thus a negative difference for the
entropy (see Fig. 3). A negative difference in the convective envelope
is in agreement with the correction required for the reference
model of Buldgen et al. (2020) to better match the Sun
(see third trend in Sect. 3.1). Regarding the density, the modification
of the temperature gradient has an interesting impact in
the radiative zone, with a large decrease in the density compared
to the reference model over a broad region below the convective
boundary. The impact on the density in the convective region for
this specific model is partly in agreement with the correction required
for this quantity in the Buldgen et al. (2020) study, with a
positive difference found only in the upper part of the convective
envelope (see the fourth trend in Sect. 3.1).

These trends are insensitive to the depth over which the temperature
gradient is modified. Increasing the depth increases the
magnitude of the differences but has no impact on their sign. We
find that the maximum variation in the model properties, such as
the speed of sound, ∆c2s/c2s,ref , roughly scales with d2
ov. This scaling is linked to the integrated area between the modified temperature
 gradient curve and the one for the reference (non-modified)
temperature gradient, which roughly decreases linearly with r.
This area is proportional to the square of the overshooting depth,
and consequently, the maximum variation in the model properties
is also proportional to d2ov. The qualitative trends also remain
the same whether overshooting mixing in the reference model
is ignored or included using a step function (with instantaneous
mixing) or an exponential decay for the diffusion coefficient (e.g.
Freytag et al. 1996).

3.2.2. Self-consistent evolutionary models

For the tests based on the second method, we ran different sets
of models with different combinations of assumptions, including
or not microscopic diffusion and with or without overshooting
mixing. When overshooting mixing was included in the overshooting
layer, it was based either on a step function or on an
exponential decay for the diffusion coefficient. Microscopic diffusion
for H and He was implemented according to Thoul et al.
(1994). For these tests, the temperature gradient was modified
according to Eqs. (2)-(5). All models start from the ZAMS and
are evolved until they reach the solar radius and luminosity at the
same age. This was achieved by making small adjustments to the
mixing length, lmix. The models with temperature gradient modifications
were compared to the relevant reference model, which
has no modification of the temperature gradient but everything
else is the same (i.e. the same treatment of microscopic diffusion
and of overshooting mixing). The evolutionary models with
temperature gradient modifications are thus self-consistent. The
main difference between this approach and the one in the previous
section is that these models accumulate small differences in,
for example, central H abundance when compared to their reference
model. These tests produce the same trends in the overshooting
layer as found for the tests based on the first method
(Sect. 3.2.1), independently of the treatment of overshooting
mixing and whether microscopic diffusion is included or not.
In the convective zone, all models give a positive difference for
the density between the model with a modified temperature gradient
and the relevant reference model. For the other quantities
(S , c2s ), the differences in the convective zone are very sensitive

Fig. 3. Difference of various structural quantities between a
model with a modified temperature gradient in the overshooting
layer and a reference model calculated with the Lyon stellar
evolution code. The temperature gradient in the modified model
is changed over a distance dov = αovHP,CB below the convective
boundary (indicated by the vertical solid line). The lower
panel shows the results for αov = 0.15 and the upper panel for
αov = 0.20.

to the assumptions regarding whether overshooting mixing is included
or not. But at least we find solutions that are compatible
with the four trends found by Buldgen et al. (2020) for the four
structural quantities. This is illustrated in Fig. 4 with a model
that accounts for step function overshooting mixing over a distance
dov = 0.15HP,CB (lower panel) and dov = 0.20HP,CB (upper
panel).

4. Conclusion

The tests performed in Sect. 3 are based on different methods
(relaxed models versus consistent evolution) that can be used to
construct solar models. Independently of the method used, the
tests show that a local increase in the temperature in the overshooting
region due to convective penetration provides the qualitative
effects required to improve the speed of sound discrepancy
below the convective boundary. This discrepancy is persistent in


Fig. 4. Difference of various structural quantities between a
modified model and a reference model calculated with the
MONSTAR stellar evolution code. The reference model is
evolved from the ZAMS with microscopic diffusion and step
function overshooting mixing over a distance dov = αovHP,CB below
the convective boundary. The lower panel shows the results
for αov = 0.15 and the upper panel for αov = 0.20. The models
with a modified temperature gradient in the overshooting layer
(same microscopic diffusion and overshooting mixing treatment
as the reference model) are evolved similarly from the ZAMS.
The convective boundary is indicated by the vertical solid line.

solar models that use low solar metal abundances. This is not
surprising because an increase in the temperature in this specific
region has previously been invoked in the literature to solve
this problem, as mentioned in Sect. 1. However, the details of
the physical process responsible for this local heating have been
lacking, whereas we can now suggest an explanation based on
the B21 results. The trends that we find for the four structural
quantities (A, S , c2s , ρ) are robust below the convective boundary
and in a large fraction of the radiative core, independently of
the treatment of mixing and diffusion and of the method for constructing
the models in Sects. 3.2.1 and 3.2.2. Our experiments
additionally show that such a local change in the temperature,
despite being made over a very limited region below the convective
boundary, can also affect the density, the entropy, and the
speed of sound in the convective envelope after thermal relaxation
or evolution on the main sequence. How these quantities
are affected in the convective envelope compared to a reference
model with no local heating depends on the strategy for building
solar models and on the treatment of overshooting mixing. This
mixing is obviously linked to the local heating given that both
result from the same dynamical process. A combined testing of
both effects in stellar models could provide more constraints on
the general process of overshooting.

Increasingly, efforts are now devoted to characterising the
process of convective boundary mixing in stellar models based
on multi-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations. More work
is required to obtain reliable determinations of an overshooting
depth and to describe quantitatively the mixing and impact on
the temperature gradient. Understanding the effects of rotation
and magnetic fields on overshooting is a significantly more difficult
theoretical and numerical problem to address; however,
efforts to study these combined non-linear effects are ongoing
(Hotta 2017; Korre et al. 2021). Despite the limitations of existing
hydrodynamical simulations, they are already providing
constraints on physical processes usually treated with several
free parameters in 1D stellar evolution models. They can thus
limit the degrees of freedom in a problem as complex as solar
modelling. Our primary goal in this work is to highlight the
potential impact of convective penetration on the thermal background
in the overshooting region. The processes studied in B21
that produce a local change in the temperature gradient are also
responsible for the mixing in this region. Because much observational
evidence points towards the need for extra mixing at convective
boundaries, for example lithium depletion in solar-like
stars (Baraffe et al. 2017), the size of convective cores (Claret
& Torres 2016), and colour-magnitude diagrams (Castro et al.
2014), solar modellers often include this extra mixing in their
models. But a consistent approach should also require accounting
for a local change in the temperature gradient. The impact of
this local heating goes in the right direction to improve not only
the discrepancies of solar models below the convective boundary,
but also in the convective envelope. This effect offers an interesting
step forward for solving the solar modelling problem.
In this exploratory work, we adopt a simple prescription for the
local heating in the overshooting layer since the main goal is
to highlight its qualitative impact on stellar models. However,
this effect should not be considered as another free parameter in
the solar modelling problem. Future multi-dimensional hydrodynamical
simulations will enable this process, and its treatment
in 1D stellar evolution codes, to be better constrained.

5. Acknowledgements

We thank our anonymous referee for valuable comments which
helped improving the manuscript. This work is supported by the
ERC grant No. 787361-COBOM and the consolidated STFC
grant ST/R000395/1. IB thanks the Max Planck Institut für
Astrophysics (Garching) for warm hospitality during completion
of part of this work. The authors would like to acknowledge the
use of the University of Exeter High-Performance Computing
(HPC) facility ISCA and of the DiRAC Data Intensive service
at Leicester, operated by the University of Leicester IT Services,
which forms part of the STFC DiRAC HPC Facility. The equipment
was funded by BEIS capital funding via STFC capital
grants ST/K000373/1 and ST/R002363/1 and STFC DiRAC
Operations grant ST/R001014/1. DiRAC is part of the National
e-Infrastructure.

References
Anders, E. & Grevesse, N. 1989, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 53, 197
Asplund, M., Amarsi, A. M., & Grevesse, N. 2021, A&A, 653, A141
Asplund, M., Grevesse, N., Sauval, A. J., & Scott, P. 2009, ARA&A, 47, 481
Baraffe, I., Chabrier, G., Allard, F., & Hauschildt, P. H. 1998, A&A, 337, 403
Baraffe, I., Pratt, J., Goffrey, T., et al. 2017, ApJ, 845, L6
Baraffe, I., Pratt, J., Vlaykov, D. G., et al. 2021, A&A, 654, A126
Brummell, N. H., Clune, T. L., & Toomre, J. 2002, ApJ, 570, 825
Brun, A. S., Miesch, M. S., & Toomre, J. 2011, ApJ, 742, 79
Buldgen, G., Eggenberger, P., Baturin, V. A., et al. 2020, A&A, 642, A36
Buldgen, G., Salmon, S., & Noels, A. 2019a, Frontiers in Astronomy and Space

Sciences, 6, 42
Buldgen, G., Salmon, S. J. A. J., Noels, A., et al. 2019b, A&A, 621, A33
Caffau, E., Ludwig, H. G., Steffen, M., Freytag, B., & Bonifacio, P. 2011,

Sol. Phys., 268, 255
Cai, T. 2020, ApJ, 888, 46
Castro, N., Fossati, L., Langer, N., et al. 2014, A&A, 570, L13
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J. 2021, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 18, 2
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Gough, D. O., & Knudstrup, E. 2018, MNRAS, 477,

3845
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Monteiro, M. J. P. F. G., Rempel, M., & Thompson,

M. J. 2011, MNRAS, 414, 1158
Claret, A. & Torres, G. 2016, A&A, 592, A15
Constantino, T., Campbell, S., Gil-Pons, P., & Lattanzio, J. 2014, ApJ, 784, 56
Edelmann, P. V. F., Ratnasingam, R. P., Pedersen, M. G., et al. 2019, ApJ, 876, 4
Freytag, B., Ludwig, H. G., & Steffen, M. 1996, A&A, 313, 497
Goffrey, T., Pratt, J., Viallet, M., et al. 2017, A&A, 600, A7
Grevesse, N. & Noels, A. 1993, in Origin and Evolution of the Elements, ed.

N. Prantzos, E. Vangioni-Flam, & M. Casse, 15–25
Higl, J., Müller, E., & Weiss, A. 2021, A&A, 646, A133
Hotta, H. 2017, ApJ, 843, 52
Hurlburt, N. E., Toomre, J., & Massaguer, J. M. 1986, ApJ, 311, 563
Käpylä, P. J. 2019, A&A, 631, A122
Korre, L., Brummell, N., Garaud, P., & Guervilly, C. 2021, MNRAS, 503, 362
Korre, L., Garaud, P., & Brummell, N. H. 2019, MNRAS, 484, 1220
Kunitomo, M. & Guillot, T. 2021, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2109.06492
Meakin, C. A. & Arnett, D. 2007, ApJ, 667, 448
Muthsam, H. J., Goeb, W., Kupka, F., Liebich, W., & Zoechling, J. 1995, A&A,

293, 127
Rogers, T. M., Glatzmaier, G. A., & Jones, C. A. 2006, ApJ, 653, 765
Thoul, A. A., Bahcall, J. N., & Loeb, A. 1994, ApJ, 421, 828
Viallet, M., Baraffe, I., & Walder, R. 2011, A&A, 531, A86
Viallet, M., Goffrey, T., Baraffe, I., et al. 2016, A&A, 586, A153
Viallet, M., Meakin, C., Arnett, D., & Mocák, M. 2013, ApJ, 769, 1
Vinyoles, N., Serenelli, A. M., Villante, F. L., et al. 2017, ApJ, 835, 202
Zahn, J. P. 1991, A&A, 252, 179
Zhang, C., Deng, L., Xiong, D., & Christensen-Dalsgaard, J. 2012, ApJ, 759,

L14
Zhang, Q. S. & Li, Y. 2012, ApJ, 746, 50
Zhang, Q.-S., Li, Y., & Christensen-Dalsgaard, J. 2019, ApJ, 881, 103
