Confidential manuscript submitted to JGR-Planets

The influence of a fluid core and a solid inner core on the
Cassini sate of Mercury

Mathieu Dumberry 1

1 Department of Physics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Key Points:

• The Cassini state obliquity of Mercury’s mantle spin axis deviates from that of a rigid
planet by no more than 0.01 arcmin.
• For a core magnetic field above 0.3 mT, electromagnetic coupling locks the fluid and solid
cores into a common precession motion.
• The larger the inner core is, the more the obliquity of the polar moment of inertia approaches
 that expected for a rigid planet.

Corresponding author: Mathieu Dumberry, dumberry@ualberta.ca

arXiv:2201.00037v1 [astro-ph.EP] 31 Dec 2021

Abstract

We present a model of the Cassini state of Mercury that comprises an inner core, a fluid core
and a mantle. Our model includes inertial and gravitational torques between interior regions,
and viscous and electromagnetic (EM) coupling at the boundaries of the fluid core. We show
that the coupling between Mercury’s interior regions is sufficiently strong that the obliquity of
the mantle spin axis deviates from that of a rigid planet by no more than 0.01 arcmin. The mantle
obliquity decreases with increasing inner core size, but the change between a large and no
inner core is limited to 0.015 arcmin. EM coupling is stronger than viscous coupling at the inner
core boundary and, if the core magnetic field strength is above 0.3 mT, locks the fluid and
solid cores into a common precession motion. Because of the strong gravitational coupling between
the mantle and inner core, the larger the inner core is, the more this co-precessing core
is brought into an alignment with the mantle, and the more the obliquity of the polar moment
of inertia approaches that expected for a rigid planet. The misalignment between the polar moment
of inertia and mantle spin axis increases with inner core size, but is limited to 0.007 arcmin.
Our results imply that the measured obliquities of the mantle spin axis and polar moment
of inertia should coincide at the present-day level of measurement errors, and cannot be
distinguished from the obliquity of a rigid planet.

Plain language summary: The plane of Mercury’s orbit around the Sun is slowly precessing
about an axis fixed in space. This entrains a precession of the spin axis of Mercury at the
same rate, an equilibrium known as a Cassini state. The angle between the spin axis and the
normal to the orbital plane is known as the obliquity and remains fixed. Observations have confirmed
that Mercury’s obliquity matches, within measurement errors, the theoretical prediction
based on an entirely rigid planet. However, we know that Mercury has a large metallic core
which is liquid, although the central part may be solid. In this work, we investigate how the
presence of a fluid and solid core affect the Cassini state of Mercury. We show that the internal
coupling between the solid core, fluid core and the mantle is sufficiently strong that the obliquity
of the mantle does not depart from that of a rigid planet by more than 0.01 arcmin, an
offset smaller than the present-day error in measurements. We also show that the larger the
solid inner core is, the more the planet behaves as if it were precessing as an entirely rigid body.

1 Introduction

Mercury is expected to be in a Cassini state (Figure 1) whereby its orbit normal and spin-symmetry
 axis are both coplanar with, and precess about, the normal to the Laplace plane [Colombo,
1966; Peale, 1969, 2006]. The orientation of the Laplace plane varies on long timescales, but
its present-day orientation can be reconstructed from ephemerides data [Yseboodt and Margot ,
2006; Baland et al., 2017]. Likewise, the rate of precession is also not observed directly, but is
reconstructed by ephemerides data. The latest estimate is a retrograde precession period of 325,513
yr with an inclination angle of I = 8.5330◦ between the orbit and Laplace plane normals [Baland
et al., 2017]. Measurements of the obliquity εm, defined as the angle of misalignment between
the spin-symmetry axis and the orbit normal, have been obtained by different techniques,
including ground based radar observations [Margot et al., 2007, 2012], and stereo digital terrain
images [Stark et al., 2015a] and radio tracking data [Mazarico et al., 2014; Verma and Margot,
2016; Genova et al., 2019; Konopliv et al., 2020] from the MErcury Surface Space ENvironment
GEochemistry and Ranging (MESSENGER) spacecraft. Within measurement errors,
all techniques yield an obliquity which is coplanar with the orbit and Laplace plane normals
and consistent with a Cassini state. Furthermore, the observed obliquity angle (2.042± 0.08


[IMAGE]

Figure 1. The orbit of Mercury (M) around Sun (S) with respect to the Laplace plane (grey shaded
rectangle) and the Cassini state of Mercury. The normal to the orbital plane (êI3) is offset from the normal
to the Laplace plane (êL3 ) by an angle I = 8.5330
◦. The symmetry axis of the mantle êp3 is offset from êI3 by εm ≈ 2 arcmin. êI3 and êp3
are coplanar with, and precess about, êL3 in a retrograde direction

at frequency Ωp = 2π/325, 513 yr
−1. The blue (orange) shaded region indicates the portion of the orbit
when Mercury is above (below) the Laplace plane. Angles are not drawn to scale.
arcmin [Margot et al., 2012], 2.029±0.085 arcmin [Stark et al., 2015a] and 1.968±0.027 [Genova
et al., 2019] to list a few) matches that expected if Mercury occupies Cassini state 1.

The prediction of Mercury’s obliquity is based on the assumption that the whole planet
precesses as a single body. However, we know that Mercury has a fluid core from two main lines
of evidence. First, Mercury’s large scale magnetic field is intrinsic, and must be maintained by
dynamo action [Anderson et al., 2011, 2012; Johnson et al., 2012]. This requires fluid motion
in its metallic core, and hence that Mercury’s core is at least partially liquid. Second, the observed
amplitude of the 88-day longitudinal libration is approximately twice as large as that
expected if Mercury were librating as a rigid body [Margot et al., 2007, 2012; Stark et al., 2015a].
This indicates that it is only the mantle that librates, and that the outer part of the core is fluid.
These evidences do not necessarily imply that the whole of Mercury’s core is fluid, but only that
its outermost part must be. A solid inner core may have nucleated at the centre although its
size is not well constrained. Inner core growth leads to planetary contraction, and the inferred
radial contraction of ∼ 7 km since the late heavy bombardment [Byrne et al., 2014] places an
approximate limit of 800 km on the inner core radius [Grott et al., 2011]. However, the inner
core could be larger if a significant fraction of its growth occurred earlier in Mercury’s history.

With a fluid core, and possibly a solid inner core, the observed obliquity εm reflects the
orientation of the spin-symmetry axis of the precessing mantle and crust alone. Neglecting dissipation,
and at equilibrium in the Cassini state, the spin axis of the fluid core and the spinsymmetry
axis of the inner core should both also precess about the normal to the Laplace plane
in a retrograde direction with a period of 325,513 yr. Both of these axes should also lie in the
plane that defines the equilibrium Cassini state [e.g. Dumberry and Wieczorek , 2016], although
their obliquity angles may be different than εm. Whether the spin axis of the fluid core is brought
into an alignment with the mantle obliquity depends primarily on the pressure torque (also referred
to as the inertial torque) exerted by the centrifugal force of the rotating fluid core on the
misaligned elliptical shape of the core-mantle boundary (CMB) [Poincaré, 1910]. The more flattened
the CMB is, the stronger the pressure torque is, and the more the fluid core is entrained
into a co-precession at a similar obliquity to that of the mantle. The flattening of Mercury’s
CMB is not known. But if one assumes that the topography of the CMB coincides with an equipotential
surface at hydrostatic equilibrium with the imposed frozen-in mass anomalies in the upper
mantle and crust, then the pressure torque at the CMB is sufficient to bring the fluid core
into a close alignment with the mantle [Peale et al., 2014]. The spin axis of the fluid core is not
expected to be exactly aligned with the spin-symmetry axis of the mantle, but sufficiently close
that the resulting mantle obliquity does not differ much from that of a single body planet. Furthermore,
viscous and electromagnetic (EM) coupling at the CMB can further restrict the misalignment
between the mantle and core [Peale et al., 2014].
If an inner core is present, its obliquity angle is determined by the sum of the torques acting
on it. This includes the gravitational torque from the Sun acting on its tilted figure, analogous
to the torque applied on the tilted mantle that sets the obliquity εm. In addition, the
tilt of the inner core also depends on the gravitational torque imposed by the mantle and the
pressure torque at the inner core boundary (ICB) imposed by the fluid core. If the mantle gravitational
torque dominates, the inner core tilt is expected to remain closely aligned with the
mantle. Conversely, if the pressure torque at the ICB is the largest, the inner core should instead
be closely aligned with the spin axis of the fluid core. A strong viscous and/or EM coupling
at the ICB should also enforce a closer alignment between the rotation vectors of the inner
core and fluid core.

It is on the basis of the observed mantle obliquity that the polar moment of inertia of Mercury
is inferred [e.g. Peale, 1976; Margot et al., 2018]. Inherent in this calculation is the built-in
assumption that the mantle obliquity does not deviate from that of a rigid planet by a substantial
amount. However, the recent study by Peale et al. [2016] suggests that the inner core
can be misaligned from the mantle by a few arcmin and that a large inner core can perturb the
orientation of the spin vector of the mantle by as much as 0.1 arcmin. This challenges the assumption
that the observed obliquity reflects the orientation of the whole planet.

Furthermore, if a large inner core is misaligned with the mantle, then the mantle spin axis
does not coincide with the orientation of the polar moment of inertia of the whole planet. This
can introduce a systematic offset between different types of obliquity measurements. Those based
on tracking topographic features [Margot et al., 2007, 2012; Stark et al., 2015a] capture the obliquity
of the mantle spin axis. While those based on the orientation of the gravity field [Mazarico
et al., 2014; Verma and Margot , 2016; Genova et al., 2019; Konopliv et al., 2020] are instead
tied to the orientation of the principal moment of inertia of the whole planet. An offset of the
obliquity of the mantle spin axis with respect to the gravity field could be used to constrain the
size of the inner core, even though this is difficult to do at present because the different estimates
of the obliquity of the gravity field do not match well with one another.

There is thus a significant interest in properly assessing how the presence of a solid inner
core at the centre of Mercury may affect its Cassini state equilibrium. Here, we present a
model of Mercury’s Cassini state that comprises a fluid core and solid inner core. The model
is an adaptation of a similar model developed to study the Cassini state of the Moon [Dumberry
and Wieczorek, 2016; Stys and Dumberry, 2018; Organowski and Dumberry, 2020]. The
specific questions that motivate our study are the following. First, we want to determine how
large the misaligned obliquities of the fluid core and solid inner core can be and how they depend
on model parameters. Second, we want to assess by how much the mantle obliquity may
differ from that of an entirely rigid Mercury, and third, by how much the obliquities of the spin-symmetry
axis of the mantle and gravity field may differ.

2 Theory

2.1 The interior structure of Mercury

Our model of Mercury consists of four layers of uniform density: a solid inner core, a fluid
outer core, a solid mantle, and a thin crust. The outer radii of each of these layers, are denoted
by rs, rf , rm, and R, and their densities by ρs, ρf , ρm, and ρc, respectively. The inner core radius
rs corresponds to the ICB radius, the fluid core radius rf to the CMB radius, and R =
2439.36 km to the planetary radius of Mercury. Compressibility effects from increasing pressure
with depth are not negligible in the core of Mercury. However adopting uniform densities
simplifies the analytical expressions of the model while still capturing the first order rotational
dynamics. Uniform densities were also adopted by Peale et al. [2016] and following the same
strategy facilitates comparisons between our results.
We build our interior model as detailed in Peale et al. [2016]. We first specify rs, ρs (or
a density contrast at the ICB), the crustal density ρc and crustal thickness h = R−rm. The
three unknowns rf , ρf and ρm are then solved such that the interior model is consistent with
the known mass M and chosen values of the moments of inertia of the whole planet C and that
of the mantle and crust Cm.

Each layer is triaxial in shape. We denote the polar flattening (or geometrical ellipticity)
by ϵi, defined as the difference between the mean equatorial and polar radii, divided by the mean
spherical radius. Likewise, we denote the equatorial flattening by the variable ξi, defined as the
difference between the maximum and minimum equatorial radii, divided by the mean spherical
radius. As above, we use the subscript i = s, f , m and r, to denote the polar or equatorial
flattenings at the ICB, CMB, crust-mantle boundary (CrMB), and surface.

The measured polar and equatorial flattenings are taken from Perry et al. [2015] and their
numerical values are given in Table 1. We then assume that the ICB and CMB are both at hydrostatic
equilibrium with the imposed gravitational potential induced by the flattenings at the
CrMB and surface. The flattenings at all interior boundaries are specified such that they are
consistent with the observed degree 2 spherical harmonic coefficients of gravity J2 and C22; their
numerical values are given in Table 1. Specifically, J2 and C22 are connected to the principal
moments of inertia of Mercury (C > B > A) and to the polar and equatorial flattenings by

J_2    = (C − Ā) / (MR²) = 8π/15 * 1//MR²) [(ρs − ρf )r^5 sϵs + (ρf − ρm)r^5 f ϵf + (ρm − ρc)r^5mϵm + ρcR^5 ϵr], (1a)
C_{22} =B −A4MR2=8π1514MR2[(ρs − ρf )r5sξs + (ρf − ρm)r^5 fξf + (ρm − ρc)r^5 mξm + ρcR^5 ξr]. (1b)

where Ā is the mean equatorial moment of inertia defined below. The same procedure was used
in Peale et al. [2016] and the mathematical details are given in Equations (18-20) of Dumberry


Mercury Parameter                   Numerical value       Reference
mean motion, n                      2π/87.96935 day−1     Stark et al. [2015b]
rotation rate, Ωo = 1.5n            2π/58.64623 day−1     Stark et al. [2015b]
orbit precession rate, Ωp           2π/325, 513 yr−1      Baland et al. [2017]
Poincaré number, δω = Ωp/Ωo         4.9327× 10−7
orbital eccentricity, ec            0.20563               Baland et al. [2017]
orbital inclination, I              8.5330◦               Baland et al. [2017]
mean planetary radius, R            2439.360 km           Perry et al. [2015]
mass, M                             3.3012× 1023 kg       Genova et al. [2019]
mean density, ρ̄                             5429.5 kg m−3
J2                                 5.0291× 10−5          Genova et al. [2019]
C22                                8.0415× 10−6          Genova et al. [2019]
polar surface flattening, ϵr       6.7436× 10−4          Perry et al. [2015]
equatorial surface flattening, ξr  5.1243× 10−4 Perry et al. [2015]

Table 1. Reference parameters for Mercury. The mass M is computed from GM = 22031.8636 × 109

m3/s2 taken from Genova et al. [2019]. The mean density is calculated from 4π
3
ρ̄R3 = M . The numerical

values of ϵr and ξr are calculated from ϵr = (ā− c)/R and ξr = (a− b)/R, where ā = 12 (a+ b) and where

a = 2440.53 km, b = 2439.28 km and c = 2438.26 km are the semimajor, intermediate and semiminor
axes of the trixial ellipsoidal shape of Mercury taken from Table 2 of Perry et al. [2015]. J2 and C22 are
computed from Equation (4) in the Supporting Information of Genova et al. [2019].
and Wieczorek [2016] who adopted the same strategy in their interior modelling of the Moon.

Note that we neglect the misalignment between the triaxial shape of Mercury’s surface topography
and the axes of the principal moments of inertia, which amount to a polar offset of ∼ 2◦
and an equatorial offset of ∼ 15◦ [Perry et al., 2015].

Once the densities and flattenings of all interior regions are known, we can specify the moments
of inertia of the fluid core (Cf > Bf > Af ) and solid inner core (Cs > Bs > As)
along with the mean equatorial moments of inertia

Ā =1/2(A+B) , Āf =1/2(Af +Bf ) , Ās =1/2(As +Bs) . (2)

From these, we define the polar (e, ef ,es) and equatorial (γ, γs) dynamical ellipticities of the
whole planet (no subscript), fluid core (subscript f) and solid inner core (subscript s), which
enter our rotational model,

e =C − Ā
     Ā


Āf

es =Cs − Ās
Ās, (3a)

γ =
B −A
Ā

γs =Bs −As
Ās. (3b)

We further note that e and γ are connected to J2 and C22 by

e =MR2

Ā
J2 , γ =

4MR2

Ā
C22 . (4)



[IMAGE]

Figure 2. Geometry of the Cassini state model of Mercury viewed (a) in the Cassini plane and (b)

in a frame attached to the rotating mantle. The orbit normal (êI3) is tilted by an angle I = 8.533
◦ from

the Laplace normal (êL3 ) and the symmetry axis of Mercury’s mantle (ê
p
3) is tilted by an obliquity εm

with respect to êI3. Shown in (a) are the orientations of the symmetry axis of the inner core (ê
s
3), the
rotation rate vectors of the mantle (Ω), fluid core (Ωf ) and inner core (Ωf ) and angles θp, θn, θm, θf
and θs in their Cassini state equilibrium. All vectors and angles are in a common plane which we refer
to as the Cassini plane. The light grey, white, and dark grey ellipsoid represent a polar cross-section of
the mantle, fluid core and inner core, respectively; blue shaded parts show an equatorial cross section.
The black curved arrow in the equatorial plane in (a) indicates the direction of rotation of the equatorial

mantle axes ê
p
1 and ê

p
2 with respect to the Cassini plane. Viewed in the frame attached to the rotating

mantle (b), the Cassini plane is rotating at frequency ωΩo = −Ωo − Ωp cos I in the longitudinal direction.
The oblateness of all three regions and the amplitude of all angles are exaggerated for purpose of

illustration.


2.2 The rotational model

Mercury’s rotation is characterized by a 3:2 spin-orbit resonance in which it completes
3 rotations around itself for every 2 orbital revolutions around the Sun. The orbital period is
87.96935 day and the sidereal rotation period is 58.64623 day [Stark et al., 2015b]. These define
the mean motion n = 2π/87.96935 day−1 and the sidereal frequency Ωo = 2π/58.64623
day−1, with Ωo = 1.5n. Mercury’s rotational state is also characterized by a Cassini state whereby
the orientations of the orbit normal (êI3) and of the mantle symmetry axis (ê
p
3) are both coplanar
with, and precess about, the normal to the Laplace plane (êL3 ). The orientation of the Laplace
plane varies on long timescales, but it can be taken as invariable in inertial space for our present
purpose. The Cassini state of Mercury is illustrated in Figure 1. The angle between êL3 and ê
I
3

is the orbital inclination I = 8.5330◦ [Baland et al., 2017], the angle between êI3 and ê
p
3 is the

obliquity εm and the angle between ê
L
3 and ê

p
3 is θp = I + εm. The precession of ê

I
3 and ê

p
3

about the Laplace pole is retrograde with frequency Ωp = 2π/325, 513 yr
−1 [Baland et al., 2017].

The mantle and crust are welded together and form a single rotating region which we refer
to as the ‘mantle’ in the context of our rotational model. The rotation and symmetry axes
of the mantle are expected to remain in close alignment, but they do not coincide exactly. We
define the rotation rate vector of the mantle by Ω, and its misalignment from ê
p 3 by an angle θm.
Note that θm ≪ εm and it is often the spin axis of Mercury which is used to define the
obliquity εm [e.g. Baland et al., 2017]. If Mercury were an entirely rigid planet, ê
p3 and Ω would
characterize the symmetry and rotation axes of the whole of Mercury, not just its mantle, and
the angles I, εm and θm would completely describe the Cassini state. The presence of a fluid
outer core and solid inner core require three additional orientation vectors and angles. The symmetry
axis of the inner core is defined by unit vector ês3 and its misalignment from ê
p3 by an
angle θn. The rotation vectors of the fluid core and inner core are defined as Ωf and Ωs, respectively,
and their misalignment from the rotation vector of the mantle Ω are defined by angles
θf and θs (see Figure 2a). The rotation and symmetry axes of the inner core remain in close
alignment, so θn ≈ θs. To be formal in our definition of the different angles of misalignment,
for I defined positive as depicted on Figure 2a, all angles are defined positive in the clockwise
direction.

At equilibrium in the Cassini state, the three orientation vectors (êI3, êp3, ês3) and three
rotation vectors (Ω, Ωf , Ωs) are forced to precess about êL3 at the same frequency. If we neglect
dissipation, all vectors lie on the same plane, which we refer to as the Cassini plane. Viewed
in inertial space, the Cassini plane is rotating in a retrograde direction at frequency Ωp. Viewed
in the frame attached to the mantle rotating at sidereal frequency Ωo, the Cassini plane is rotating
in a retrograde direction at frequency ωΩo (see Figure 2b), where ω, expressed in cycles
per Mercury day, is equal to
ω = −1− δω cos(θp). (5)

The factor δω = Ωp/Ωo = 4.933 × 10−7 is the Poincaré number, expressing the ratio of the
forced precession to sidereal rotation frequencies. The invariance of the Laplace plane normal
as seen in the mantle frame is expressed as
d/dt êL3 + Ω× êL3 = 0 , (6)
or equivalently, by Equation (19e) of Stys and Dumberry [2018],
ω sin(θp) + sin(θm + θp) = 0 . (7)

This expresses a formal connection between θp and θm which is independent of the interior structure
of Mercury. Using Equation (5) and cos(θm)→ 1, this connection can be rewritten as
sin(θm) = δω sin(θp). (8)
and thus the relative amplitudes of θm and θp depend of the Poincaré number δω.
To investigate Mercury’s response to the gravitational torque from the Sun, we take advantage
of the framework developed in Mathews et al. [1991] to model the forced nutations of
Earth [see also Mathews et al., 2002; Dehant and Mathews, 2015]. This model takes into account
the pressure torque (also referred to as the inertial torque) that results when the spin axis
of the fluid core is misaligned from the symmetry axes of the elliptical surfaces of the CMB and
ICB. It also includes the gravitational torque exerted on the inner core when it is misaligned
with the mantle. Electromagnetic and viscous torques at both the CMB and ICB have been
incorporated into the framework [e.g Buffett , 1992; Buffett et al., 2002; Mathews and Guo, 2005;
Deleplace and Cardin, 2006]. The framework was adapted to model the Cassini state of the Moon
in Dumberry and Wieczorek [2016] and further developed in Stys and Dumberry [2018] and Organowski
and Dumberry [2020]. We adapt it here to capture the Cassini state of Mercury.
Because the forced precession period is much longer than the rotation and orbital periods
of Mercury, the gravitational solar torque that is relevant to the Cassini state is the mean
torque averaged over one orbit. This mean torque is perpendicular to the Cassini plane, pointing
in the same direction as the vector connecting the Sun to the descending node of Mercury’s
orbit in Figure 1. Hence, viewed from the mantle frame, the orientation of this mean torque
is periodic, rotating at frequency ωΩo. Setting the equatorial directions êp1 and êp2 to correspond
to the real and imaginary axes of the complex plane, respectively, we can write the equatorial
components of this periodic applied torque in a compact form as
Γ1(t) + iΓ2(t) = −i Γ̃(ω) exp[iωΩot] , (9)
where Γ̃(ω) represents the amplitude of the torque at frequency ωΩo. In response to this torque,
the axes defining all angles (θp, εm, θm, θf , θs, θn) as viewed in the mantle frame are also rotating
at frequency ωΩo (see Figure 2). The longitudinal direction of each of these angles at
a specific time t can then also be written in the equatorial complex plane and is proportional
to exp[iωΩot]. For instance, the two equatorial time-dependent components θm1 and θm2 of the
angle θm, as seen in the mantle frame, can be written as

θm1(t) + iθm2(t) = m̃ exp[iωΩot] , (10a)

where

m̃ ≡ m̃(ω) = Re[m̃] + iIm[m̃] , (10b)

is the amplitude at frequency ωΩo. Equivalent definitions apply for all other angles, with the
connection as follows:

θm ⇔ m̃ , θf ⇔ m̃f , θs ⇔ m̃s , θn ⇔ ñs , θp ⇔ p̃ , εm ⇔ ε̃m . (11)

The notation m̃, m̃f , m̃s, ñs follows that introduced in the original model of Mathews et al. [1991].

Note that all tilded amplitudes are complex: their imaginary part reflects the out-of-phase response
to the applied torque as a result of dissipation, for instance from viscous or EM coupling
at the boundaries of the fluid core. In the absence of dissipation, all tilded variables are purely
real. We concentrate our analysis in this work on the real part of the solutions, which corresponds
to the mutual alignment of these five rotation angles in the Cassini plane. As such, ε̃m
corresponds to the observed obliquity of the mantle symmetry axis. It is thus equivalent to εm,
though we keep the tilde notation in the presentation of our results to emphasize that it represents
the real part of the solution from our system. Furthermore, since m̃ ≪ ε̃m, we often
refer to ε̃m as the orientation of spin axis of the mantle, since the Cassini state of Mercury is
more customarily described in terms of the latter in the literature.

The model of Mathews et al. [1991] is developed under the assumption of small angles as
appropriate for the nutations on Earth. The details on how the equations of the model are derived
can found in Mathews et al. [1991] and in Dumberry and Wieczorek [2016]. Three equations
describe, respectively, the time rate of change of the angular momenta of the whole of Mercury,
the fluid core, and the inner core in the reference frame of the rotating mantle. These three
equations are

(ω − e)m̃+ (1 + ω) [ĀfĀm̃f +ĀsĀm̃s + α3esĀsĀñs] = 1iΩ2oĀ (Γ̃sun), (12a)
ωm̃+ (1 + ω + ef ) m̃f − ωα1esĀsĀfñs =1iΩ2oĀf(− Γ̃cmb − Γ̃icb), (12b)
(ω − α3es)m̃+ α1esm̃f + (1 + ω) m̃s + (1 + ω − α2) esñs = 1iΩ2oĀs (Γ̃ssun + Γ̃icb)
, (12c)

and a fourth equation consists of a kinematic relation that expresses the change in the orientation
of the inner core figure as a result of its own rotation,

m̃s + ωñs = 0 . (12d)

In these equations, the parameters α1, α2 and α3 involve the density contrast at the ICB
and are given by

α1 =ρfρs, α3 = 1− α1 , α2 = α1 − α3αg , (13a)

where the parameter αg is a measure of the ratio of the gravitational to inertial torque applied
on the inner core,

αg =8πG5Ω2o[ρc(ϵr − ϵm) + ρm(ϵm − ϵf ) + ρf ϵf ] , (13b)

where G is the gravitational constant.

Γ̃sun is the amplitude of the gravitational torque by the Sun on the whole of Mercury. For
a small mantle obliquity ε̃m and a small inner core tilt ñs, it is given by

Γ̃sun = −iΩ2oĀ(φmε̃m +ĀsĀα3φsñs), (14)

where

φm =32n2Ω2o[G210 e+12G201 γ], (15a)
φs =32n2Ω2o[G210 es +12G201 γs], (15b)

and where G210 and G201 are functions of the orbital eccentricity ec,

G210 =1(1− e2c)3/2, (16a)
G201 =72ec −12316e3c +489128e5c . (16b)

The gravitational torque by the Sun acting on the inner core alone, Γ̃ssun, is

Γ̃ssun = −iΩ2oĀsα3φs(ε̃m + ñs) . (17)

Γ̃cmb and Γ̃icb are the torques from tangential stresses by the fluid core on the mantle at the
CMB and on the inner core at the ICB, respectively. These torques can be parameterized in
terms of dimensionless complex coupling constants Kicb and Kcmb and the differential angular
velocities at each boundary [e.g Buffett , 1992; Buffett et al., 2002],

Γ̃icb = iΩ2oĀsKicb(m̃f − m̃s) , (18a)
Γ̃cmb = iΩ2oĀfKcmb m̃f . (18b)

Specific expressions for Kicb and Kcmb are delayed to sections 4 and 5 when we consider the
effects of viscous and EM coupling, respectively.
A fifth equation is required to connect this interior model to the obliquity of the mantle,
and this is provided by Equation (7). For small angles θm and θp, this gives [e.g. Mathews et al.,
1991; Dumberry and Wieczorek , 2016; Baland et al., 2019]

m̃+ (1 + ω)p̃ = 0 . (19)

For Mercury, it is more convenient to connect the internal model with ε̃m instead of p̃. This
is because θp ≈ 8.567◦ whereas ε̃m ≈ 2 arcmin and thus the latter obeys more strictly the
condition of small angles assumed in our framework. Furthermore, the external torques acting
on the whole planet (Equation 14) and inner core (Equation 17) depend linearly on ε̃m. Written
in terms of ε̃m, and with the approximation of ε̃m ≪ 1 and m̃≪ 1, Equation (7) becomes

m̃+ (1 + ω)ε̃m = −(1 + ω) tan I . (20)

Likewise, the frequency ω from Equation (5) can be written simply in terms of I,

ω = −1− δω cos I . (21)

The set of four Equations (12) with the addition of Equation (20) form a linear system
of equations for the five rotational variables m̃, m̃f , m̃s, ñs and ε̃m. It captures the response
of Mercury, in the frequency domain, when subject to a periodic solar torque applied at frequency
ω. The system can be written in a matrix form as

M · x = y , (22a)
where the solution (x) and forcing (y) vectors are

xT = [m̃, m̃f , m̃s, ñs, ε̃m] , (22b)
yT = [0, 0, 0, 0,−(1 + ω) tan I] , (22c)

and the elements of matrix M are

M =




ω − e (1 + ω) Āf
Ā

(1 + ω) Ās
Ā

Ās
Ā
α3
(
(1 + ω)es + φs

)
φm

ω 1 + ω + ef +Kcmb +
Ās
Āf
Kicb − ĀsĀf Kicb −ωesα1

Ās
Āf

0

ω − α3es α1es −Kicb 1 + ω +Kicb (1 + ω − α2)es + α3φs α3φs
0 0 1 ω 0

1 0 0 0 (1 + ω)


 .

(22d)

Solutions of the homogeneous system (i.e. y = 0) represent free modes of precession. Three
modes have periods which, when seen in inertial space, are typically in the range of a few hundred
to a few thousand years. The first is the free axial precession of Mercury maintained by
the solar torque acting on its elliptical figure [e.g. Peale, 2005]. The second is the free core nutation
(FCN), which is the free precession of the spin axis of the fluid core about the symmetry
axis of the CMB [e.g. Mathews et al., 1991]. The third is the free inner core nutation (FICN),
a free mode of rotation similar to the FCN but associated with the inner core [e.g. Mathews et al.,
1991].

A few remarks on our model are important to point out before we proceed further. First,
although we have retained the triaxial shape of Mercury in the expression of the solar torque,
we treat its angular momentum response as if it were an axially symmetric body. This is convenient
as the two equatorial angular momentum equations for each region can be combined
into a single equation. To first order, the frequency of the free precession of Mercury is not largely
altered by triaxiality [e.g. Peale, 2005]. Baland et al. [2019] showed that the frequencies of the
FCN and FICN for a triaxial planetary body may be slightly different than those for an axially
symmetric body, but not by large factor. As the response of Mercury to the solar torque
is largely determined by the resonant amplification due to the presence of these three modes,
our model should capture correctly the first order Cassini state of Mercury. Considering the
triaxial shape of Mercury may alter the numerical results, but not our general conclusions.

Second, our modelling approach is different than in the studies of Peale et al. [2014] and
Peale et al. [2016]. In these two studies, dynamical models of Mercury’s Cassini state are developed
and must then be integrated in time. The equilibrium Cassini state is the quasi-steady
state that remains after transient effects associated with the initial conditions have decayed away.

An advantage of these models compared to ours is that the complete triaxial dynamics of Mercury,
including its longitudinal librations, are retained. However, the numerical integration can
be lengthy if dissipation is weak, which restricts the number of possible interior models of Mercury
that can be tested. In contrast, our model is a simple linear system in the frequency domain,
focused on one specific frequency: the forced precession associated with the Cassini state.
Solutions are straightforward to obtain for a given interior model, and this allows us to cover
a larger span of the parameter space. One drawback, however, is that our model does not capture
time-dependent variations at any other frequencies, including the precession of the pericenter
of Mercury’s orbit about the Sun.


2.3 Analytical solutions and limiting cases

2.3.1 The Cassini state of a single-body, rigid Mercury

For a rigid planet with no fluid and solid cores, our system of equations reduces to Equations
(12a) and (20),

(ω − e)m̃+ φm ε̃m = 0 , (23a)
m̃+ (1 + ω)ε̃m = −(1 + ω) tan I . (23b)

Using Equation (21), δω ≪ 1, and the approximation Ā(1 + e+ δω cos I) = C+ Āδω cos I ≈
C, these can be written as

Cm̃ = Āφm ε̃m , (24a)

m̃ = δω
(

sin I + cos I ε̃m
)
. (24b)

Equation (24b) gives a direct relationship between m̃ and ε̃m. For I = 8.5330
◦, δω =

4.9327×10−7 and taking ε̃m = 2.04 arcmin, this gives m̃ = 2.52×10−4 arcmin, much smaller
than ε̃m: the offset of the rotation axis of the mantle with respect to its symmetry axis is very

small. Substituting Equation (24b) in Equation (24a) gives

CΩp(sin I + cos I ε̃m)= ĀΩoφmε̃m , (25)

and isolating for ε̃m,

ε̃m =CΩp sin I−CΩp cos I + ĀΩoφm. (26)

Upon using Equations (4), (15a), and Ωo =32n, we can write

ε̃m =CΩp sin I−CΩp cos I + nMR2 (G210J2 + 2G201C22). (27)

This is the standard prediction for the obliquity of a rigid Mercury occupying Cassini state 1
[see for instance Equation (1) of Baland et al., 2017, where their definition of Ω̇ is equal to −Ωp].
Hence, in the absence of a fluid core and inner core, our system retrieves the Cassini state of
Mercury correctly. Equation (27) can be manipulated to solve instead for the normalized moment
of inertia Ĉ,

Ĉ =CMR2=nΩpG210J2 + 2G201C22cos I + sin I/ε̃m. (28)

which is equivalent to Equation (89) of Van Hoolst [2015]. It is based on the latter equation
that a measurement of the obliquity gives a constraint on Ĉ.

Two free modes of precession are found by setting y = 0 in Equation (23). One mode corresponds
to the Eulerian wobble, or Chandler wobble, and represents the prograde precession
of the rotation axis about the symmetry axis. The second mode is the free retrograde axial precession
of Mercury. As seen in the inertial frame, its frequency is given by


ωfp = nMR2C(G210J2 + 2G201C22), (29)

which is equivalent to the prediction by Peale [2005] when neglecting its small elliptical component.
Note that in Peale [2005] it was assumed that only the mantle was involved in the solidbody
precession and hence C was replaced by Cm. Using C = 0.346 · MR2 [Margot et al.,
2012] and the numerical values for n, J2, C22 and ec given in Table 1, we obtain a free precession
period of Tfp = 2π/ωfp = 1298 yr. If we use Cm instead of C in Equation (29), and take

Cm = 0.431 ·C = 0.431 ·0.346 ·MR2 [Margot et al., 2012], we obtain Tfp = 2π/ωfp = 560 yr.
These estimates are similar to those obtained by Peale [2005]. Because the CMB is elliptical,
the pressure torque exerted on the fluid core by the mantle leads to an entrainment of the fluid
core, the degree of which depends on the amplitude of the pole-to-equator CMB flattening. The
true free precession period lies somewhere between 560 and 1298 yr. Regardless of its exact value,
the free precession period is much shorter than the forcing period of 325 kyr. Using Equation
(29), Equation (27) can be written as [e.g. Baland et al., 2017]

ε̃m =Ωp sin I−Ωp cos I + ωfp. (30)

The obliquity of Mercury is thus determined by how the forcing frequency Ωp compares with
the free precession frequency ωfp. Because ωfp > Ωp, Mercury occupies Cassini state 1 [Peale,
1974]. Furthermore, Equation (30) shows that a large obliquity can be generated by resonant
amplification if Ωp ≈ ωfp. Since ωfp ≫ Ωp, resonant amplification is minimal and the resulting
obliquity, ε̃m ≈ 2 arcmin, is much smaller than the inclination angle I ≈ 8.5◦.

2.3.2 The misalignment of the fluid and solid cores

With ω = −1− δω cos I and δω ≪ 1, Equation (12d) gives ñs ≈ m̃s; as for the mantle,
the rotation and symmetry axes of the inner core remain closely aligned in the Cassini state.

The relationship between m̃ and ε̃m of Equation (24b) is independent of the interior structure,
so it remains unchanged when a fluid and a solid cores are present. Substituting it in Equation
(12a), and setting ñs = m̃s, the angular momentum equation of the whole planet becomes

CΩp(sin I + cos I ε̃m)+ (Āf cos I Ωp)m̃f + Ās(cos I Ωp − Ωoα3φs)ñs = ĀΩoφmε̃m . (31)

This latter equation shows how the misaligned inner core and fluid core can lead to a modification
of the mantle obliquity ε̃m. Approximate analytical solutions of ñs and m̃f are given by

ñs ≈Ωpκλs(1 +Ωo(Kicb − α1es)λf)(sin I + cos I ε̃m)−Ωoα3φsκλsε̃m , (32a)

m̃f ≈Ωpλf(sin I + cos I ε̃m)+Ωoλf ĀsĀf(Kicb − α1es)ñs , (32b)

where

κ = 1−ĀsĀfΩ2o(Kicb − α1es)2λs λf, (33a)
λf = σ̄f − Ωp cos I , (33b)
λs = σ̄s − Ωp cos I , (33c)


and where we have introduced the frequencies

σ̄f = Ωo(ef +Kcmb +ĀsĀfKicb), (33d)
σ̄s = Ωo(esα3αg − esα1 + α3φs +Kicb). (33e)

These solutions are good approximations for all the results that we present in section 3. For
an observed mantle obliquity ε̃m and for a chosen set of interior model parameters, they provide
useful predictions of ñs and m̃f .

In the limit of a very strong coupling between the fluid core, solid core and mantle, σ̄s ≫
Ωp and σ̄f ≫ Ωp, so that ñs → 0, m̃f → 0 and Equation (31) reverts back to Equation (25)
for a rigid planet. In the opposite limit of no coupling between the fluid core, solid core and
mantle (i.e. for spherical internal boundaries, ef = es = γs = 0 and no viscous or EM coupling,
Kcmb = Kicb = 0), then

φs = 0 , κ = 1 , λf = λs = −Ωp cos I , m̃f = ñs = −(tan I + ε̃m) . (34)

Inserting these in Equation (31), and with the moment of inertia of the mantle equal to

Cm = C − Āf − Ās, we obtain Cm Ωp (sin I + cos I ε̃m) = ĀΩoφmε̃m . (35)

which describes, as expected, a forced precession of the mantle alone. If this was the case for
Mercury, taking Cm/C = 0.431, the obliquity should be ε̃m ≈ 0.88 arcmin, substantially smaller
than the observed obliquity of ε̃m ≈ 2 arcmin.

If σ̄f ≈ Ωp (and thus λf → 0) and/or σ̄s ≈ Ωp (and thus λs → 0) resonant amplification
leads to large amplitudes for m̃f , ñs and the mantle obliquity ε̃m. The frequencies σ̄f and
σ̄s are closely related to the FCN and FICN frequencies ωfcn and ωficn, respectively. Hence,
just as a large mantle obliquity can result from resonant amplification when the forcing frequency
approaches the free precession frequency, a large mantle obliquity can likewise result from resonant
amplification when the forcing frequency approaches the FCN or FICN frequencies. These
frequencies depend on the interior density structure and are not known. However, we will show
that for reasonable interior models of Mercury, the FCN and FICN periods are in the range of
a few hundred yr. This is sufficiently far from the forcing period (325 kyr) that we do not expect
an important amplification effect. Furthermore, since ωfcn, ωficn � Ωp, then σ̄f ≫ Ωp
and σ̄s ≫ Ωp, and we are in the strong coupling limit. The mantle obliquity should be close
to that expected for a rigid planet, as observations suggest. Therefore, we expect that m̃f and
ñs should be of the order of ε̃m or smaller. This further justifies the assumption of small angles
that we have adopted.

3 Results

3.1 Geodetic constraints and interior density structure

All our interior models are constrained to match the mass M of Mercury and specific choices

of Ĉ = C/MR2 and Cm/C. The choice of Ĉ is determined from Equation (28). For the parameters
listed in Table 1, and an observed obliquity of εm = 2.04 arcmin [Margot et al., 2012],
this gives Ĉ = C/MR2 = 0.3455 and all our interior models are consistent with this choice.

Obviously, this reflects a Cassini state equilibrium in which the fluid core and inner core are
perfectly aligned with the mantle, which is not strictly correct. Hence, we make an error in estimating
Ĉ from Equation (28), or conversely in predicting εm based on a given choice for Ĉ.

Part of the objective of our study is to estimate how large this error is. The ratio Cm/C is obtained
from the amplitude of the 88-day longitudinal mantle libration φo, which is given by

φo = 6 · f(ec)C22 MR2 C C Cm 1 1 + ζ, (36)

where

f(ec) = 1− 11e2c + 959 48 e4c , (37)

and where ζ is a correction that takes into account the entrainment of the inner core in the libration
[Van Hoolst et al., 2012; Dumberry et al., 2013; Dumberry and Rivoldini, 2015]; this correction
is small and, to simplify, we neglect it here. Taking the observed libration amplitude
to be 38.5 arcsec [Margot et al., 2012], Ĉ = C/MR2 = 0.3455 and C22 and ec from Table 1,
this corresponds to a ratio Cm/C = 0.4269, or equivalently Ĉm = Cm/MR
2 = 0.1475.

For all results presented in our study, the crustal density is set at ρc = 2974 kg m−3[Sori,
2018]. Our standard choice for the crustal thickness is h = 26 km [Sori, 2018], although in
section 3.2 we also present some results with other choices of h. We have considered two possible
prescriptions connected to the density of the inner core. First, for all the results presented
in sections 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4, we have used a fixed inner core density of ρs = 8800 kg m−3 approximately
that obtained in Dumberry and Rivoldini [2015] under the assumption of a pure
Fe composition in face-centered cubic phase. This captures an end-member scenario where the
core composition is an Fe-S alloy; at Mercury’s core conditions, crystallization of Fe is relatively
free of S on the Fe-rich side of the eutectic [Li et al., 2001]. If the core composition is instead
an Fe-Si alloy, approximately equal partitioning of Si between the liquid and solid phase [e.g.
Schaefer et al., 2017] implies a weak chemical contrast at the ICB. The density jump across the
ICB is expected to be small, although since density increases with depth, the contrast between
the mean densities of the fluid and solid cores is larger. It is these mean densities that enter
our Mercury model with uniform density layers. To capture this other end-member core composition
scenario, in section 3.5 we present results where we instead prescribe a fixed density
contrast between the fluid and solid core; specifically, we set the numerical value of α3.

For a given choice of inner core radius rs, the densities of the mantle (ρm) and fluid core
(ρf ) and the radius of the CMB (rf ) are determined such that the interior model matches M,
Ĉ = 0.3455 and Ĉm = 0.1475. Figure 3a shows how ρm, ρf and rf vary as a function of inner
core radius rs for each of the two inner core density scenarios: a fixed ρs, or a fixed α3. When
the inner core is small, its presence has a limited influence on the resulting density structure,
and we find ρm = 3197 kg m−3, ρf = 7263 kg m−3 and rf = 2000 km in each of the two
scenarios. When ρs is fixed to 8800 kg m−3, as the inner core reaches 1500 km in size, rf increases
to above 2100 km, ρm approaches 4000 kg m−3 and ρf is reduced to below 5000 kg m−3.

Figure 3a illustrates that when adopting a fixed ρs, there is a limit in the possible inner core
size, as otherwise ρm gets unreasonably large and ρf gets inappropriately small (as it would
require an excessively large concentration of light elements). When adopting instead a fixed density
contrast, with α3 = 0.1, the changes in rf , ρm and ρf with inner core radius are more modest,
allowing larger possible inner core sizes. Different assumptions on ρc and h would alter the
numerical values shown on Figure 3a but not their trends with rs.

Figure 3b shows how the FCN and FICN periods vary with rs for each of the two inner
core density scenarios and in the absence of viscous and EM coupling (i.e. Kcmb = Kicb =


[IMAGE]
Figure 3. a) Fluid core density (red), mantle density (blue), fluid core radius (orange, right-hand
side scale) and b) FICN (blue) and FCN (red) periods as a function of inner core radius. The FCN
period when the external torque is set to zero (FCNint) is shown in orange. Solid lines correspond to
a scenario where the density of the inner core is set to 8800 kg m−3; thin dashed lines correspond to a
scenario where the density contrast between the fluid and solid cores is set to α3 = 0.1.

0). Both of these free modes are retrograde. The FCN period is close to 400 yr for a small inner
core, increasing to approximately 600 yr at the largest rs. The FICN period is shorter, close
to 100 yr (160 yr) for a small inner core and decreasing to approximately 40 yr (120 yr) at the
largest rs under the fixed ρs (fixed α3) scenario. This confirms that the FCN and FICN periods
are both much shorter than the forcing precession period of 325 kyr and sufficiently far away
from it that we do not expect large m̃f and ñs from resonant amplification.

The FCN and FICN periods that we have computed include the influence of the external
torque. As shown by Baland et al. [2019], the external torque allow solid regions to have
a free motion in inertial space thereby affecting the free rotational modes. To a good approximation,
the FCN and FICN frequencies (as seen in an inertial frame) for Kcmb = Kicb = 0

are given by

ωfcn ≈ −Ωo(ĀĀm + Ās)(ef + φm)+ Ωoefφm(ef + φm), (38a)
ωficn ≈ Ωo(Ā+ ĀsĀ− Ās)(esα1 − esα3αg − α3φs). (38b)

The expression of the FICN frequency involves the inertial torque (term esα1) and the gravitational
torque from the rest of Mercury (esα3αg) and the Sun (α3φs) acting on the inner core.

For both of our inner core density scenarios (and our choices of ρs = 8800 kg m−3 and α3 =
0.1), the internal gravitational torque dominates that from the Sun. Furthermore, α3αg ≫ α1;
the gravitational torque dominates the inertial torque, in large part because of the slow rotation
rate of Mercury. As a result the FICN frequency is negative (i.e. the precession motion
is retrograde). This is also the case for the Moon [e.g. Dumberry and Wieczorek, 2016; Stys and
Dumberry, 2018], but it is different for Earth, where α1 > α3αg because of its faster rotation
and the FICN mode is prograde [Mathews et al., 1991]. Note also that our approximate expression
for the FICN differs by a factor (Ā+Ās)/(Ā−Ās) compared to that given in Dumberry
and Wieczorek [2016] and Stys and Dumberry [2018] for the Moon.

The expression for FCN frequency differs from the usual expression for Earth. First, it
involves the external torque from the Sun captured by the parameter φm. If we set φm = 0,
we obtain the FCN frequency for a decoupled model in which only interior torques contribute,

ωfcn,int ≈ −Ωo(ĀĀm + Ās)ef . (38c)

This frequency is slightly different from the usual expression for Earth, involving the ratio Ā/(Ām+
Ās) rather than Ā/Ām. This is because of the relatively thin mantle of Mercury; for the largest
rs considered, the moment of inertia of the inner core can get close to 40% of that of the mantle
and is not negligible. The period of the FCN when only interior torques contribute is shown
in Figure 3b. It is close to 1100 yr for a small inner core, increasing to approximately 1500 yr
at the largest rs. Hence, the influence of the solar torque reduces the FCN period by a factor
of approximately 3. We note that the FICN period, in contrast, is not altered substantially when
the external torque is set to zero.

3.2 Gravitational and inertial coupling

Let us now investigate the obliquities of the mantle, fluid core and inner core in their equilibrium
Cassini state. We assume a fixed inner core density scenario in this section, with ρs =
8800 kg m−3. Viscous and EM coupling are set to zero in order to isolate the influence of gravitational
and inertial coupling. Figure 4 shows how ε̃m, m̃f and ñs vary as functions of inner
core radius. We show calculations for three different choices of crustal thickness, but let us concentrate
first on the case for h = 26 km. For small rs, we retrieve an obliquity of ε̃m = 2.0494
arcmin (Figure 4a). ε̃m decreases with rs, but not substantially; at the largest rs (1500 km),
ε̃m = 2.0460 arcmin, a decrease of 0.0034 arcmin. The maximum difference from ε̃m = 2.04
arcmin, the obliquity that we used in setting the constraint for Ĉ – and hence the prediction
we should recover for a rigid planet – is an overestimate of approximately 0.01 arcmin which
occurs for small inner cores.

The deviation of ε̃m from that of a rigid planet is due to the misalignments of the fluid
core (m̃f ) and solid inner core (ñs) with respect to the mantle (Figure 4b). The misalignment
of the fluid core spin axis from the mantle is significant: m̃f is approximately 4.02 arcmin for
a small inner core and does not vary substantially with inner core size; it drops to 3.97 arcmin
at the largest rs. Recall that m̃f is measured with respect to the mantle rotation axis (which
coincides closely with the symmetry axis), so the obliquity of the spin axis of the fluid core with
respect to the orbit normal is ε̃m+m̃f ≈ 6 arcmin. The reason why the obliquity of the spin
axis of the fluid core is larger than that of the mantle can be understood from Equation (32b),
which shows that m̃f is determined by the resonant amplification of the FCN mode at the forcing
frequency. When the FCN frequency is much larger than the forcing frequency, as is the
case for Mercury, the resonant amplification is very weak but remains present and m̃f is larger
than zero.

In contrast to m̃f , the misalignment of the inner core with respect to the mantle is much
smaller; ñs is approximately between 0.023-0.025 arcmin, a factor 80 times smaller than ε̃m.

Physically, this is because the gravitational torque acting on the inner core when it is tilted from
the mantle is much stronger than the inertial torque acting at the ICB. As a result, the inner
core must remain in close alignment with the mantle. Presented differently, since the FICN period
 is more than 3000 times shorter than the forced precession period, the inner core can easily
follow the forced precession of the mantle and remains gravitationally locked to it. ñs does
not change substantially as the inner core increases in size.


[IMAGE]

Figure 4. a) Obliquity of the mantle (ε̃m, solid lines) and of the principal moment of inertia (ε̃g,
dashed line) b) m̃f (solid lines) and ñs (dashed lines, x100) as a function of inner core radius and for
different choices of crustal thickness.

When Kicb = Kcmb = 0, a good approximation of ε̃m is given by

ε̃m =C ′Ωp sin I−C ′Ωp cos I + ĀΩoφm, (39)

which is identical to the prediction of Equation (26) for a rigid Mercury, except C is replaced
by C ′. The latter represents an effective moment of inertia that accounts for the coupling of
the core to the mantle,

C ′ = C + Ācχ , (40)

where Āc = Āf + Ās and

χ =Ωp cos IĀc(Āf(σ̄f − Ωp cos I)+Ās(σ̄s − Ωp cos I))−ĀsĀcΩoα3φs(σ̄s − Ωp cos I). (41)

The frequencies σ̄f and σ̄s are given in Equations (33d-33e) and closely approximate the FCN
and FICN frequencies of Equations (38c) and (38b), respectively. The factor χ captures then
how the core is entrained to precess with the mantle, with the coupling between the two expressed
in terms of the resonant amplification of the FCN and FICN frequencies. In the limit
of σ̄f , σ̄s → 0, then χ = −1, C ′ = Cm, the core is fully decoupled from the mantle and we
retrieve Equation (35). If instead σ̄f , σ̄s → ∞, then χ = 0, C ′ = C and we retrieve the prediction
for a rigid planet. When both the FCN and FICN frequencies are much larger than Ωp,
as is the case here, resonant amplification is weak, χ is small and positive, C ′ > C and this
leads to a slightly larger ε̃m compared to a rigid planet. Because the inner core core is gravitationally
locked to the mantle, deviations from a rigid planet are dominantly caused by the
misalignment of the fluid core. In Equation (41), σ̄s ≫ σ̄f , so to a good approximation


χ ≈ĀfĀcΩo cos I(σ̄f − Ωp cos I). (42)

For a small inner core, χ ≈ 7.55×10−3. As the inner core grows, Āf decreases, and the combination
Ācχ also decreases. This implies that C′ decreases with inner core size and, consequently,
ε̃m also decreases with inner core size, as seen in Figure 4a, though it remains larger than the
prediction for a rigid planet.

The specific predictions of ε̃m, m̃f and ñs on Figure 4 depend sensitively on the assumed
interior density model and on the dynamical ellipticities of the inner core (es) and fluid core
(ef ). Hence, it depends on the choices we have made for the inner core density ρs, the crustal
density ρc and its thickness h. Changing ρs, ρc and/or h requires a different combination of ρf ,
ρm and rf in order to match M , Ĉ and Ĉm. In turn, this leads to different ellipticities at interior
boundary in order to match J2 and C22, and thus different predictions for ε̃m, m̃f and
ñs. To illustrate this, we show on Figure 4 two additional predictions computed with crustal
thicknesses changed to h = 16 and 36 km. The change in ε̃m remains modest, ∼ 0.025%, but
the changes in m̃f and ñs are more substantial, ∼ 5% and ∼ 10%, respectively.

We also show on Figure 4a (only for h = 26 km) the obliquity of the principal moment
of inertia of the whole planet, which we denote by ε̃g. A difference between ε̃g and ε̃m occurs
if the inner core is misaligned with the mantle. As seen in the mantle frame, a tilted inner core
(with ñs assumed small) leads to an off-diagonal component of the moment of inertia tensor

of (Cs−Ās)α3ñs = Āsesα3ñs. The angle by which the mantle frame must be rotated so that
the moment of inertia of the whole planet is purely diagonal is (Āsesα3ñs)/(Āe), and hence a

good approximation of ε̃g is

ε̃g = ε̃m +ĀsesĀeα3ñs . (43)

Since the inner core is gravitationally forced into a close alignment with the mantle, the difference
between ε̃g and ε̃m remains very small. For the largest inner core radius that we have
considered, ε̃g differs from ε̃m only by approximately 0.001 arcmin.

3.3 Viscous coupling

We now investigate how viscous coupling at the CMB and ICB affects the equilibrium Cassini
state. Peale et al. [2014] present two different parameterizations of viscous coupling based on
the timescale of attenuation of the differential rotation between the fluid core and mantle. More
complete analytical solutions for the flow resulting from a differentially precessing shell have
been derived [e.g. Stewartson and Roberts, 1963; Busse, 1968; Rochester , 1976] and we exploit
these solutions here. The parametrization of the viscous coupling constants Kcmb and Kicb based
on them are given in Mathews and Guo [2005],

Kcmb =πρfr4fĀf√ν2Ωo (0.195− 1.976i), (44a)
Kicb =πρfr4sĀs√ν 2Ωo (0.195− 1.976i), (44b)

where ν is the kinematic viscosity. The appropriate numerical value for ν in planetary interior
is not well known but based on theoretical and experimental studies it is expected to be
of the order of 10−6 m2 s−1 [e.g. Gans, 1972; de Wijs et al., 1998; Alfè et al., 2000; Rutter et al.,
2002a,b].

The above parameterizations are valid only under the assumption that the flow in the boundary
layer remains laminar. Whether this is reasonable can be assessed by evaluating the Reynolds
number Re = rf∆uf/ν, associated with the differential velocity ∆uf = rfΩom̃f at the CMB.

For rf = 2000 km, and taking m̃f = 4 arcmin ≈ 0.001 rad from the results in the previous
section, we get ∆uf ∼ 2 mm/s and Re ∼ 6 × 109. Such a large Reynolds number indicates
that the viscous friction between the fluid core and mantle should induce turbulent flows, as
is the case for the Cassini state of the Moon [Yoder , 1981; Williams et al., 2001; Cébron et al.,
2019]. For a boundary layer that involves turbulent flows, the viscous torque should be independent
of the fluid viscosity and proportional to the square of the differential velocity. The
coupling constant Kcmb should be in the form

Kcmb = fcmb∣∣m̃f ∣∣(0.195− 1.976i) , (45)

where fcmb is a numerical factor that depends among other things on surface roughness. Incorporating
a viscous coupling of this form in our rotational model is more challenging not only
because fcmb is not known but also because the viscous torque is no longer linear in m̃f . One
strategy is to find solutions through an iterative process. The simpler alternative strategy that
we adopt is to use the laminar formulas of Equation (44) but with the understanding that ν
represents an effective turbulent viscosity.

To give an estimate of an appropriate turbulent value for ν, we turn to the Cassini state
of the Moon. A measure of the viscous dissipation at the CMB of the Moon has been obtained
by fitting a rotation model to the librations of the Moon observed by Lunar Laser Ranging (LLR)
[Williams et al., 2001, 2014; Williams and Boggs, 2015]. Viscous dissipation is reported in terms
of a coupling parameter K and a recent estimate is K/CL = (1.41±0.34)×10−8 day−1 [Williams
and Boggs, 2015], where CL is the lunar polar moment of inertia. The connection between K
and Kcmb is

∣∣∣Im[Kcmb]∣∣∣ = KCLCLCfL1ΩL, (46)

where CfL is the moment of inertia of the lunar core and ΩL = 2.66 × 10−6 s−1 the lunar
rotation rate. With CfL/CL ∼ 7× 10−4 [e.g. Williams et al., 2014], this gives |Im[Kcmb]| ∼
9×10−5. In order to match this amplitude in Equation (44a), with lunar parameters and assuming
a lunar core radius of 400 km, the required turbulent viscosity is ν ≈ 5 × 10−4 m2
s−1, about 500 times larger than the laminar viscosity. Note that the differential velocity at the

CMB of the Moon is closer to 3 cm/s [Yoder , 1981; Williams et al., 2001], more than 10 times
larger than our estimate for Mercury above. Since the effective turbulent coupling constant Kcmb
is proportional to the differential velocity, the effective turbulent viscosity appropriate for Mercury
should be smaller. Thus, ν ≈ 5×10−4 m2 s−1 gives a conservative upper bound for the
possible effective turbulent viscosity that can be expected for Mercury.

Figure 5 shows how ε̃m, m̃f and ñs vary as functions of inner core radius for different choices
of effective viscosities. For ν = 10−5 m2 s−1, viscous coupling is too weak to affect ε̃m and
m̃f and they are essentially unchanged from the solutions shown in Figure 4. With increasing
ν, the stronger viscous coupling between the core and the mantle reduces their differential velocity,
and m̃f is reduced. With the reduced differential velocity at the CMB, the prediction
of ε̃m gets closer to 2.04 arcmin, the obliquity expected for a rigid planet. Although our CMB
viscous coupling model is different than the one used by Peale et al. [2014], our results for ε̃m
and m̃f are qualitatively similar: viscous coupling at the CMB acts to reduce the offset of the
fluid spin axis from the mantle symmetry axis. Considering the upper bound in turbulent viscosity
 that we have identified above (i.e ν ≈ 5 × 10−4 m2 s−1), the influence of viscous coupling
 on ε̃m remains modest, reducing its amplitude by a maximum of approximately 0.0015 arcmin.

[IMAGE]

Figure 5. a) Obliquity of the mantle (ε̃m, solid lines) and gravity field (ε̃g, dashed lines) b) m̃f
(solid lines) and ñs (dashed lines) as a function of inner core radius and for different choices of kinematic
viscosity (color in legend).

The inclusion of viscous coupling at the ICB can lead to a substantial change in inner core
tilt. A larger viscosity leads to stronger viscous coupling and to a closer alignment of the inner
core with the fluid core spin axis. The viscous coupling strength is inversely proportional
to rs, so a larger viscosity results in a larger inner core radius at which viscous coupling is of
a similar magnitude to gravitational coupling. Taking again an upper bound of ν = 5×10−4
m2 s−1, Figure 5 indicates that ñs may be 1 arcmin or larger only if the inner core radius is
smaller than approximately 100 km. For an inner core of a few hundred km in radius, gravitational
coupling is much larger than viscous coupling, and the inner core tilt is limited to a
fraction of 1 arcmin.

The larger inner core tilt observed with increasing effective viscosity results in a larger
offset between the obliquity of the principal moment of inertia ε̃g and that of the mantle ε̃m,
though it remains limited. For the upper bound of ν = 5 × 10−4 m2 s−1, and for rs = 1500
km, the difference between ε̃g and ε̃m is limited to 0.0013 arcmin.

The conclusion that emerges from Figure 5 is that the larger the inner core is, the smaller
the misalignments of both the fluid core and inner core are with respect to the mantle. This
implies that the larger the inner core is, the more we approach a planet precessing as a rigid
body, although the misalignment of the spin axis of the fluid core remains important, approximately
3-4 arcmin away from the mantle symmetry axis. The specific way in which ε̃m, m̃f
and ñs change with inner core size would certainly be different for a turbulent model of viscous
coupling. But the general conclusion remains that the addition of viscous coupling at the CMB
and ICB does not significantly modify the Cassini state equilibrium angle of the mantle.

3.4 Electromagnetic coupling

Let us now turn to electromagnetic (EM) coupling. To focus on its role in the equilibrium
Cassini state, we set the viscous coupling back to zero. Because magnetic field lines tend to remain
attached to electrically conducting materials, a differential tangential motion between two
electrically conducting regions stretches existing magnetic field lines that thread their interface.

This induces a secondary magnetic field (or equivalently, an electrical current) and an associated
tangential EM stress resisting the differential motion. EM coupling at the CMB and ICB
acts then in a similar way to viscous coupling, and this ’magnetic friction’ depends on the strength
of the radial magnetic field Br and the electrical conductivity σ on either side of the boundary
[Rochester , 1960, 1962, 1968].

The parametrization of EM coupling in terms of the coupling constants Kcmb and Kicb
has been developed in a few studies [e.g. Buffett , 1992; Buffett et al., 2002; Dumberry and Koot ,
2012]. Assuming a dominating axial dipole field, with a radial component at the CMB given
by Br = √3〈Bdr〉 cos θ, where 〈Bdr〉

is the r.m.s. strength of the field, the coupling constant Kcmb can be written is the form

Kcmb = 3(1− i)Fcmb 〈Bdr〉2, (47)

where

Fcmb =1Ωoρfrf(1σmδm+1σfδf)−1, (48)

and where σm, δm =√2/(σmµΩo) and σf , δf =√2/(σfµΩo) are the electrical conductivities
and magnetic skin depths in the mantle and fluid core, respectively, with µ = 4π×10−7
N A−2 the magnetic permeability of free space. The r.m.s. field strength 〈Bdr〉 is connected to
the Gauss coefficient g01 of the surface magnetic field by 〈Bdr〉=2√3(Rrf)3 ∣∣g01∣∣ . (49)
We can readily build an estimate of the amplitude of Kcmb. The electrical conductivity
of common mantle minerals in Earth’s mantle at the pressure and temperature corresponding
to the CMB of Mercury is in the range of σm ∼ 0.01 − 1 S m−1 [Constable, 2015]. In contrast,
the electrical conductivity of Fe in planetary cores is expected to be close σf ∼ 106 S
m−1 [Pozzo et al., 2012; de Koker et al., 2012]. This implies that (σmδm)

−1 � (σfδf )−1. Taking
 σm = 1 S m

−1,
∣∣g01∣∣ = 190 nT for Mercury’s dipole field [Anderson et al., 2012], rf =

2000 km, ρf = 7000 kg m
−3, this gives Kcmb ≈ (3.1× 10−11) · (1− i). To put this amplitude

in perspective, taking a molecular viscosity of ν = 10−6 m2 s−1 in Equation (44a) gives a viscous
coupling constant of Kcmb ≈ (6.0× 10−7) · (0.195− 1.976i). Hence, EM coupling at the
CMB is much weaker than viscous coupling, even if we include other spherical harmonic components
of the radial magnetic field.

EM coupling can be enhanced if strongly stratified pockets of core fluid are trapped by

CMB cavities [Buffett , 2010; Glane and Buffett , 2018], in which case the effective σm could be

closer to σf . Likewise, σm can be increased if a more electrically conducting layer has formed
at the bottom of Mercury’s mantle, for instance by the upward sedimentation and compaction
of solid FeS crystals precipitating out of the fluid core [e.g. Hauck et al., 2013]. However, even
in the extreme case of σm = σf = 10
6 S m−1, Kcmb ≈ (1.6 × 10−8) · (1 − i), which remains
smaller by a factor ∼ 60 than the smallest possible viscous coupling constant. Viscous forces
dominate the tangential stress on the CMB of Mercury.

At the ICB, because we can expect the electrical conductivity in both the solid inner core
and fluid core to be similar, and because the radial magnetic field is likely much stronger, EM
coupling can be much larger and dominate viscous coupling. We assume that the magnetic field
morphology at the ICB is dominantly comprised of small spatial scales for example as predicted
by the dynamo model of Christensen [2006]. EM coupling in this case can be parametrized in
terms of an equivalent uniform radial magnetic field 〈Br〉 capturing its r.m.s. strength [Buffett
et al., 2002; Dumberry and Koot , 2012]. Assuming an electrical conductivity σ equal in the
fluid and solid core, the coupling constant Kicb can be written in the form

Kicb = 54 (1− i)Ficb 〈Br〉2, (50)

where

Ficb = σδΩoρsrs, (51)

and where δ =√2/(σµΩo) is the magnetic skin depth. As Ficb is inversely proportional to
rs, Kicb is inversely proportional to inner core size. Note that computing the EM coupling based
on the r.m.s. strength 〈Br〉 rather than a true field morphology tends to overestimate the strength
of the coupling [Koot and Dumberry , 2013]. However, since the strength of the radial magnetic
field at the ICB of Mercury is largely unknown, imperfections of the EM coupling model are
absorbed in the range of possible 〈Br〉 values.

The parametrization of Equation (50) is only valid in a ’weak field’ regime [Buffett et al.,
2002], when the feedback from the Lorentz force on the flow in the fluid core can be neglected.

When 〈Br〉 is sufficiently large, this is no longer the case. EM coupling then enters a ’strong
field’ regime [Buffett et al., 2002; Dumberry and Koot , 2012; Koot and Dumberry , 2013] in which
Kicb increases linearly with 〈Br〉 instead of quadratically. A good approximation of Kicb calculated
for Earth can be extracted from Figure 6a of Dumberry and Koot [2012],

KEicb = (0.175− i0.138) 〈Br〉 , (52)

where 〈Br〉 is in units of Tesla. The superscript E emphasizes that the numerical factors are
appropriate for the parameter values adopted for Earth in the computation of Dumberry and
Koot [2012]. To adapt these numerical factors to Mercury, we write,

Kicb = (0.175− i0.138) Ficb FEicb〈Br〉 , (53)

where FEicb is defined as in Equation (51) but using the parameters for Earth as defined in Dumberry
and Koot [2012]. These are Ωo = 7.292 × 10−5 s−1, ρs = 12846 kg m−3, rs = 1221.5
km, σ = 5× 105 S m−1, which gives FEicb = 90.36 T−2.

To compute Ficb, we assume an electrical conductivity of σ = 106 S m−1 in the core of
Mercury [e.g. de Koker et al., 2012; Deng et al., 2013]. The transition between the weak and
strong field regime occurs when 〈Br〉 ≈ 1.53 mT for the real part of Kicb. 〈Br〉 at the ICB
of Mercury is unknown. The dynamo model of Christensen [2006] showed that the field geometry
inside the core could be dominated by small length scales, yet only the weaker lower harmonics
of the field would penetrate through a thermally stratified layer in the upper region of
the fluid core and reach the surface. If so, the field strength inside the core can exceed the surface
field strength by a factor 1000. Taking a surface field strength equal to ∼ 300 nT [e.g Anderson
et al., 2012], 〈Br〉 at the ICB could be as large as 0.3 mT, corresponding to approximately
10% of the field strength within Earth’s core. Given that it is perhaps unlikely that Mercury’s
field can be as high as that in Earth’s core, in all likelihood EM coupling at the ICB of

Mercury remains in the weak field regime.

Figure 6 shows how ε̃m, m̃f and ñs vary as functions of inner core radius for different choices

of 〈Br〉. The larger 〈Br〉 is, the stronger is the EM coupling at the ICB, and the smaller is the
differential rotation between the fluid core and inner core. The inner core and fluid core are virtually
locked into a common precession motion when 〈Br〉 > 0.3 mT. Further increasing 〈Br〉
above 1 mT does not change the solution as EM coupling already dominates all other torques
on the inner core. This is the case even when EM coupling transitions into the strong field regime.

EM coupling at the CMB is included in these calculations, with σm = 1 S m
−1 and

∣∣g01∣∣ =
190 nT, but remains much weaker than the inertial torque at the CMB, so for a small inner core

we retrieved the solutions of ε̃m and m̃f shown in Figure 4.

As the inner core radius is increased, both ε̃m and m̃f get smaller, as it was the case with

viscous coupling alone, although the addition of EM coupling lead to more substantial changes.
The inner core needs to be larger than approximately 500 km for changes in the Cassini state
equilibrium to be noticeable. It is important to point out that m̃f is reduced not because of

EM coupling at the CMB, but rather from the combination of EM coupling at the ICB, which
pulls the fluid core towards an alignment with the inner core, and gravitational coupling on the
inner core, which pulls the latter to align with the mantle. The larger the EM coupling is, the
greater is the reduction in ε̃m and m̃f .

When the EM coupling at the ICB is sufficiently strong that the fluid and solid cores are
locked into a common precession motion, a good approximation of ε̃m is given by the same prediction
as Equations (39-40) involving the effective moment of inertia C ′, except χ is now given
by

χ =
ĀcΩp cos I − ĀsΩoα3φs

ĀfΩo(ef +Kcmb) + ĀsΩoesα3αg − ĀcΩp cos I
. (54)

For a small inner core, ĀcΩp cos I > ĀsΩoα3φs and χ is positive. Because ĀsΩoα3φs increases
with inner core size, χ gets smaller, and so do C ′ and ε̃m. The mantle obliquity drops from 2.049
arcmin for a small inner core to 2.034 arcmin for an inner core of 1500 km, a reduction of 0.015
arcmin. For an inner core larger than ≈ 1000 km, ĀcΩp cos I < ĀsΩoα3φs, so χ becomes negative,
C ′ becomes smaller than the moment of inertia of a rigid Mercury C, and ε̃m becomes
smaller than the prediction based on a rigid planet.

The larger the inner core is, the smaller are the misalignments of the fluid and solid cores
with respect to the mantle. Hence, the general conclusion we reached for viscous coupling alone
is not altered with the addition of EM coupling but further strengthened; the larger the inner
core is, the closer we approach a planet precessing as a rigid body. This is best revealed by the
obliquity of the gravity field ε̃g which, for a large inner core, asymptotically approaches the obliquity
expected for a rigid planet. Note that with strong EM coupling at the ICB, the offset between
ε̃m and ε̃g can be as large as 0.008 arcmin for a large inner core.

3.5 Fixed inner core density versus fixed ICB density contrast

Coupling models when viscous and EM stresses are both present have been presented in
Mathews and Guo [2005] and Deleplace and Cardin [2006]. However, in the light of our results,

[IMAGE]

Figure 6. a) Obliquity of the mantle (ε̃m, solid lines) and gravity field (ε̃g, dashed lines) b) m̃f
(solid lines) and ñs (dashed lines) as a function of inner core radius and for different choices of Br
(colour in legend).
for the Cassini state equilibrium of Mercury, the tangential stress at the CMB is dominated by
viscous forces, and that at the ICB should be dominated by EM forces. To simplify, we consider
a model where Kcmb is purely from viscous coupling and Kicb purely from EM coupling.
We choose an effective viscosity at the CMB of ν = 10−4 m2 s−1, which we believe to be a
representative value given the comparison with the Moon (see section 3.3). We take a radial
field strength at the ICB of 〈Br〉 = 0.3 mT, approximately the field strength expected under
the dynamo scenario of Christensen [2006]. We adopt these values as those of a ‘representative’
coupling model, although the uncertainty on ν and 〈Br〉 obviously remains high.

Figure 7 shows how ε̃m, m̃f and ñs vary with inner core radius for the ’representative’
coupling model (black lines) under the fixed inner core density scenario that we have used in
sections 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4. Figure 7 also shows how the results change when, for the same representative
coupling model, we adopt instead a fixed density contrast between the fluid and solid
cores and for different choices of α3 (coloured lines). For a relatively high density contrast (α3 =
0.2), the results are qualitatively similar to the fixed inner core density scenario. For a smaller
α3, the point at which the orientation of the co-precessing fluid and inner cores begins to be
pulled into an alignment with the mantle is pushed to a larger inner core radius. However, the
general behaviour of ε̃m, m̃f and ñs as functions of inner core radius is unchanged. Hence, all
our results in the previous three sections would be qualitatively similar under a fixed density
contrast scenario. A smaller density contrast at the ICB only implies that a larger inner core
is required in order to produce an equivalent change in the Cassini state equilibrium.

4 Discussion

The study of Peale et al. [2016] also presented predictions of the obliquities of the mantle,
fluid core and inner core associated with the equilibrium Cassini state of Mercury. Their
model included the tangential viscous stress at the ICB and CMB, but not the EM stress. Their
Table 1 gives the obliquities of the mantle, fluid core and inner core, denoted respectively as


[IMAGE]

Figure 7. a) Obliquity of the mantle (ε̃m, solid lines) and gravity field (ε̃g, dashed lines) b) m̃f
(solid lines) and ñs (dashed lines) as a function of inner core radius, for a fixed inner core density of
8800 kg m−3 (black lines) and for different choices of α3 (coloured lines).

i′m, i′ f and i′ s; these represent the obliquities with respect to the orbital plane and are connected
to our variables by: i′m = ε̃m, i′ f = ε̃m+m̃+m̃f ≈ ε̃m+m̃f and i′ s = ε̃m+ ñs. To summarize
their results, i′f and i′s vary substantially for different inner core sizes, are always of comparable
amplitude, and i′s is always larger than i′ f . Furthermore, they find that as the inner core
size is increased, the mantle obliquity i′m gets progressively larger and is displaced further away
from its expected orientation based of a rigid planet (see their Figure 6). The change in i′m they
obtain between a case with no inner core and an inner core radius equal to 0.6 times the planetary
radius (≈ 1463 km, close to the maximum inner core size of 1500 km we have considered),
is approximately an increase of 5 × 10−5 rad = 0.17 arcmin. This also corresponds approximately
to the deviation of the obliquity with respect to that of a rigid planet.

When only viscous stress is included in our model (section 3.3), our results are substantially
different. As illustrated in Figure 4, we find instead that the obliquity of the fluid core
gets smaller with inner core size and that the change is very modest. In contrast with the results
of Peale et al. [2016], we find that the inner core obliquity is typically smaller than that
of the fluid core, except when the inner core is very small or when the effective viscosity is unreasonably
large. We also find that as the inner core size is increased, the mantle obliquity gets
smaller, opposite to the results of Peale et al. [2016], and that the changes remain small, at most
of the order of 0.005 arcmin. A part of the difference is due to the different viscous coupling
model that we use. But even when we adopt their model parameters and use their viscosity model,
we were not able to reproduce their results.

In the absence of viscous and EM coupling, the strong gravitational torque exerted on the
inner core by the mantle should prevent any large misalignment between the two. This is captured
by the period of the FICN, which is of the order of 100 yr, much shorter than the forcing
period of 325 kyr. Viscous and/or EM coupling at the ICB can counteract the gravitational
torque (and alter the period of the FICN), but only for a small inner core. The ratio of the viscous
EM torque to the gravitational torque decreases with inner core size, so a large inner core should
be more strongly aligned with the mantle. The more strongly the inner core and mantle are
gravitationally locked together, the more they behave as a single rigid body in response to the
external torque from the Sun. We expect then that the obliquity of the mantle should be brought
closer to that of a rigid planet when the inner core is larger. Hence, we find puzzling the results
of Peale et al. [2016], which suggest the opposite.

We showed that EM coupling is most likely larger than viscous coupling at the ICB, even
though our knowledge of the radial magnetic field strength inside Mercury (on which EM coupling
depends) remains poor. If the magnetic field strength at the ICB is above 0.3 mT, EM
coupling is sufficiently strong to bring the fluid and solid cores into a locked procession motion.
The larger the inner core is, the more this co-precessing core is forced into an alignment with
the mantle because of the mantle gravitational torque on the inner core. As a result, the larger
the inner core is, the closer we approach a situation resembling a whole planet precessing as
a rigid body. The addition of EM coupling at the ICB does not change the overall picture that
we observe with viscous coupling alone; the mantle obliquity decreases with inner core size. The
amplitude of the decrease can be as large as 0.015 arcmin, 3 times larger than for viscous coupling
alone; this remains a factor 10 smaller than the changes suggested in Peale et al. [2016],
and again, importantly, in the reverse direction.

Our results suggest then that the presence and size of an inner core leads to only modest
changes of the mantle obliquity εm compared to the obliquity predicted on the basis of an
entirely rigid planet (εrm). Let us denote this difference as ∆εm = εm−εrm. The largest ∆εm
occurs for a small or no inner core, and is ∆εm ≈ 0.01 arcmin. This difference is decreased
as the inner core size is increased. For a sufficiently large inner core, in the case of a strong EM
coupling and large density contrast at the ICB, ∆εm can be negative, but its absolute value
remains smaller than 0.01 arcmin.

To put these results in perspective, the uncertainty in the measurement of the mantle obliquity
reported by Margot et al. [2012] and Stark et al. [2015a] is of the order of 0.08 arcmin, much
larger than this difference. This means that, at the current level of precision, it is not possible
to distinguish the position of the mantle obliquity from the obliquity of a rigid planet. This
is consistent with the fact that the observed obliquity falls close to that expected from a rigid
planet. But it also implies that the observed obliquity cannot be used to place constraints on
the inner core size.

Nevertheless, our results show that the presence of a fluid core and inner core affect the
resulting mantle obliquity by as much as 0.01 arcmin. This is of the same order as the change
in obliquity caused by elastic tidal deformation, which is of the order of 0.35 arcsec (≈ 0.006
arcmin) [Baland et al., 2017]. This is also of the same order as the amplitude of the nutation
motion about the mean equilibrium Cassini state forced by the precession of the pericenter, which
is approximately 0.85 arcsec (≈ 0.014 arcmin) [Baland et al., 2017]. The precision on the obliquity
from the upcoming BepiColombo satellite mission is expected to be ≤ 0.5 arcsec (≤ 0.008
arcmin) [Cicalò et al., 2016]. Thus, in addition to including tidal deformation and the precession
of the pericenter, a Cassini state model that includes a fluid and solid core will then be
necessary in order to properly tie Mercury’s obliquity to its interior structure. In turn, this opens
the possibility of further constraining the interior structure of Mercury on the basis of its obliquity.

Obliquity measurements based on tracking topographic features reflect the orientation of
the spin-symmetry axis of the mantle (εm). Measurements based on tracking the gravity field
of Mercury reflect instead the orientation of the principal moment of the whole planet (εg). These
two orientations do not coincide when an inner core is present and is misaligned from the mantle.
Since gravitational coupling prevents a large inner core tilt with respect to the mantle, we
find that the misalignment ∆εg = εg − εm is limited. The maximum offset that we obtain
is approximately ∆εg ≈ 0.007 arcmin. This limited magnitude of offset is important in the
light of the recent obliquity of the gravity field estimated in Genova et al. [2019], εg = 1.968±
0.027 arcmin. This is substantially smaller than the two mesurements of the obliquity of the
spin-symmetry axis of the mantle: εm = 2.04 ± 0.08 arcmin [Margot et al., 2012] and εm =
2.029±0.085 arcmin [Stark et al., 2015a], although all three measurements remain consistent
with one another within their error estimates. In their interpretation, Genova et al. [2019] suggest
that the different central value of the obliquity that they obtain (smaller by ∼ 0.07 arcmin)
is perhaps explained by an offset ∆εg due to the presence of a (possibly large) solid inner
core. However, this is one order of magnitude larger than the maximum magnitude of ∆εg
that we predict. Moreover, we predict that the obliquity of the gravity field should be larger
than that of the mantle spin axis, not smaller. Hence, at the present-day level of the precision
of the measurements, εg and εm should coincide, and their difference cannot be interpreted as
reflecting the misalignment between the polar moment of inertia of the whole planet and the
mantle spin axis.

Lastly, we have concentrated our efforts on the mutual orientations of the different spin
and symmetry axes in the Cassini plane. Dissipation at the CMB and ICB introduced by viscous
and EM coupling also lead to a displacement of these axes in the direction perpendicular
to the Cassini plane [e.g Peale et al., 2014]. Indeed, the two measurements based on tracking
surface topographic features from Margot et al. [2012] and Stark et al. [2015a] suggest that
the mantle spin axis lags behind the Cassini plane by approximately 2 arcsec (∼ 0.03 arcmin).
Although this offset is smaller than the measurement errors, so that the observed obliquity is
still consistent with no deviation away from the Cassini plane, some amount of dissipation invariably
takes place. These measurements give then a measure of the possible amplitude of the
dissipation. One source of dissipation is from anelastic tidal deformation [Baland et al., 2017],
but viscous and EM coupling at the boundaries of the fluid core is another. Hence, the out-of-plane
component of the observed obliquity may further help to quantify and constrain the interior
coupling mechanisms. This will be the subject of a future study.

5 Conclusion

We have investigated how the presence of a fluid core and solid inner core affects the Cassini
state equilibrium of Mercury. Our general conclusion is that the coupling strength between Mercury’s
interior regions is sufficiently strong that the obliquity of the mantle spin-symmetry axis
does not deviate from that of a rigid planet by more than 0.01 arcmin. This largest offset occurs
for a small or no inner core. The larger the inner core is, the more it is forced into an alignment
with the mantle because of the strong gravitational torque between the two, and the closer
we approach a situation resembling a whole planet precessing as a rigid body. The misalignment
between the polar moment of inertia and mantle spin axis increases with inner core size,
but is limited to approximately 0.007 arcmin. These conclusions apply irrespective of the core
composition and thus of the partitioning of light elements into the solid core; a smaller density
contrast at the ICB only implies that a larger inner core is required in order to produce
an equivalent change in the Cassini state equilibrium.

Our results imply that the obliquities of the mantle spin axis and polar moment of inertia
(or, equivalently, the gravity field) should coincide at the present-day level of measurement
errors. Moreover, neither of these can be distinguished from the obliquity predicted on the basis
of a rigid planet. However, the smaller measurement errors expected from the upcoming Bepi-Columbo
satellite mission may permit this distinction, and thus provide further constraints on
Mercury’s interior structure.

Acknowledgments

Figures were created using the GMT software [Wessel et al., 2013]. The source codes, GMT
scripts and data files to reproduce all figures are freely accessible in Dumberry [2020]. This work
was supported by an NSERC/CRSNG Discovery Grant.

References

Alfè, D., G. Kresse, and M. Gillan (2000), Structure and dynamics of liquid iron under core
conditions, Phys. Rev., B61, 132–142.

Anderson, B. J., C. L. Johnson, H. Korth, M. E. Purucker, R. M. Winslow, J. A. Slavin,
S. C. Solomon, R. L. McNutt, M. Raines, Jim, and T. H. Zurbuchen (2011), The global
magnetic field of Mercury from MESSENGER orbital observations, Science, 333, 1859–
1862.

Anderson, B. J., C. L. Johnson, H. Korth, R. M. Winslow, J. E. Borovsky, M. E. Purucker,
J. A. Slavin, S. C. Solomon, M. T. Zuber, and R. L. McNutt (2012), Lowdegree
structure in mercury’s planetary magnetic field, J. Geophys. Res., 117, E00L12,
doi:10.1029/2012JE004159.

Baland, R.-M., A. Yseboodt, M. Rivoldini, and T. Van Hoolst (2017), Obliquity of Mercury:
Influence of the precession of the pericenter and of tides, Icarus, 291, 136–159.
Baland, R.-M., A. Coyette, and T. Van Hoolst (2019), Coupling between the spin precession
and polar motion of a synchronously rotating satellite: application to Titan,

Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 131 (11), 1–50.

Buffett, B. A. (1992), Constraints on magnetic energy and mantle conductivity from the
forced nutations of the Earth, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 19,581–19,597.

Buffett, B. A. (2010), Chemical stratification at the top of earth’s core: Constraints from
observations of nutations, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 296, 367–372.

Buffett, B. A., P. M. Mathews, and T. A. Herring (2002), Modeling of nutation-precession:
effects of electromagnetic coupling, J. Geophys. Res., 107, doi:10.1029/2001JB000056.

Busse, F. H. (1968), Steady fluid flow in a precessing spheroidal shell, J. Fluid Mech., 33,

739–751.

Byrne, P. K., C. Klimczak, A. M. C. Sengör, S. C. Solomon, T. R. Watters, and S. A.

Hauck (2014), Mercury’s global contraction much greater than earlier estimates, Nature

Geosci., 7, 301–307.

Cébron, D., R. Laguerre, J. Noir, and N. Schaeffer (2019), Precessing spherical shells:

flows, dissipation, dynamo and the lunar core, Geophys. J. Int., 219 (Supplement 1),

S34–S57, doi:10.1093/gji/ggz037.

Christensen, U. R. (2006), A deep dynamo generating Mercury’s magnetic field, Nature,
444, 1056–1058.

Cicalò, S., G. Schettino, S. Di Ruzza, E. M. Alessi, G. Tommei, and A. Milani (2016), The
BepiColombo MORE gravimetry and rotation experiments with the ORBIT14 software,

Month. N. Roy. Astr. Soc., 457, 1507–1521.

Colombo, G. (1966), Cassini’s second and third laws, Astron. J., 71, 891–896.

Constable, S. (2015), Geomagnetic induction studies, in Treatise on Geophysics, Second

Edition, vol. 5, edited by G. Schubert and M. Kono, chap. 7, pp. 219–254, Elsevier, Oxford.

de Koker, N., G. Seinle-Neumann, and V. Vlček (2012), Electrical resistivity and thermal
conductivity of liquid Fe alloys at high P and T, and heat flux in Earth’s core, Proc.

Nat. Acad. Sci., 109, 4070–4073.


de Wijs, G. A., G. Kresse, L. Vočadlo, D. Dobson, D. Alfé, M. J. Gillan, and G. D. Price
(1998), The viscosity of liquid iron at the physical conditions of the Earth’s core, Nature,
392, 805–807.

Dehant, V., and P. Mathews (2015), Earth rotation variations, in Treatise on Geophysics,
vol. 3, edited by G. Schubert, chap. 10, pp. 263–305, Elsevier, Oxford.

Deleplace, B., and P. Cardin (2006), Viscomagnetic torque at the core mantle boundary,
Geophys. J. Int., 167, 557–566.

Deng, L., C. Seagle, Y. Fei, and A. Shahar (2013), High pressure and temperature electrical
resistivity of iron and implications for planetary cores, Geophys. Res. Lett., 40, 33–37,

doi:10.1029/2012GL054347.

Dumberry, M. (2020), Replication Data for: The influence of a fluid core and a solid inner
core on the Cassini sate of Mercury, https://doi.org/10.7939/DVN/903HUV, UAL

Dataverse, V2.

Dumberry, M., and L. Koot (2012), A global model of electromagnetic coupling for nuta

tions, Geophys. J. Int., 191, 530–544.

Dumberry, M., and A. Rivoldini (2015), Mercury’s inner core size and core-crystallization
regime, Icarus, 248, 254–268.

Dumberry, M., and M. A. Wieczorek (2016), The forced precession of the Moon’s inner
core, J. Geophys. Res. Planets, 121, 1264–1292.

Dumberry, M., A. Rivoldini, T. Van Hoolst, and M. Yseboodt (2013), The role of Mercury’s
core density structure on its longitudinal librations, Icarus, 225, 62–74.

Gans, R. F. (1972), Viscosity of the Earth’s core, J. Geophys. Res., 77, 360–366.

Genova, A., S. Goossens, E. Mazarico, F. G. Lemoine, G. A. Neumann, W. Kuang,
T. J. Sabaka, S. A. Hauck II, D. E. Smith, S. C. Solomon, and M. T. Zuber (2019),
Geodetic evidence that Mercury has a solid inner core, Geophys. Res. Lett., 46,
doi:10.1029/2018GL081135.

Glane, S., and B. A. Buffett (2018), Enhanced core-mantle coupling due to stratification at
the top of the core, Frontiers in Earth Science, 6, 171, doi:10.3389/feart.2018.00171.

Grott, M., D. Breuer, and M. Laneuville (2011), Thermo-chemical evolution and global
contraction of Mercury, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 307, 135–146.

Hauck, S. A., J.-L. Margot, S. C. Solomon, R. J. Phillips, C. L. Johnson, F. G. Lemoine,
E. Mazarico, T. J. McCoy, S. Padovan, S. J. Peale, M. E. Perry, D. E. Smith, and M. T.

Zuber (2013), The curious case of Mercury’s internal structure, J. Geophys. Res., 118,
doi:10.1002/jgre.20091.

Johnson, C. L., M. E. Purucker, H. Korth, B. J. Anderson, R. M. Winslow, M. M. H.

Al Asad, J. A. Slavin, I. I. Alexeev, R. J. Phillips, M. T. Zuber, and S. C. Solomon
(2012), MESSENGER observations of mercury’s magnetic field structure, J. Geophys.

Res., 117, E00L14, doi:10.1029/2012JE004217.

Konopliv, A. S., R. S. Park, and A. I. Ermakov (2020), The Mercury gravity field, orientation,
love number, and ephemeris from the MESSENGER radiometric tracking data,

Icarus, 335, 113,386.

Koot, L., and M. Dumberry (2013), The role of the magnetic field morphology on the
electromagnetic coupling for nutations, Geophys. J. Int., 195, 200–210.

Li, J., Y. Fei, H. Mao, K. Hirose, and S. Shieh (2001), Sulfur in Earth’s inner core, Earth
Planet. Sci. Lett., 193, 509–514.

Margot, J. L., S. J. Peale, R. F. Jurgens, M. A. Slade, and I. V. Holin (2007), Large longitude
libration of Mercury reveals a molten core, Science, 316, 710–714.

Margot, J. L., S. J. Peale, S. C. Solomon, S. A. Hauck, F. D. Ghigo, R. F. Jurgens,
M. Yseboodt, J. D. Giorgini, S. Padovan, and D. B. Campbell (2012), Mercury’s
moment of inertia from spin and gravity data, J. Geophys. Res., 117, E00L09,
doi:10.1029/2012JE004161.

Margot, J. L., S. A. Hauck II, E. Mazarico, S. Padovan, and S. J. Peale (2018), Mercury’s
internal structure, in Mercury: The View after MESSENGER, edited by S. Solomon,
L. Nittler, and B. Anderson, pp. 85–113, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, doi:
10.1017/9781316650684.005.

Mathews, P. M., and J. Guo (2005), Viscoelectromagnetic coupling in precession-nutation
theory, J. Geophys. Res., 110 (B02402), doi:10.1029/2003JB002915.

Mathews, P. M., B. A. Buffett, T. A. Herring, and I. I. Shapiro (1991), Forced nutations of
the Earth: Influence of inner core dynamics. 1. theory, J. Geophys. Res., 96, 8219–8242.

Mathews, P. M., T. A. Herring, and B. A. Buffett (2002), Modeling of nutations and precession:
New nutation series for nonrigid Earth and insights into the Earth’s interior, J.

Geophys. Res., 107, doi:10.1029/2004JB000390.

Mazarico, E., A. Genova, S. Goossens, F. G. Lemoine, G. A. Neumann, M. T. Zuber,
D. E. Smith, and S. C. Solomon (2014), The gravity field, orientation, and ephemeris of
Mercury from MESSENGER observations after three years in orbit, J. Geophys. Res.

Planets, 119, 2417–2436.

Organowski, O., and M. Dumberry (2020), Viscoelastic relaxation within the Moon
and the phase lead of its Cassini state, Journal of Geophysical Research Planets, 125,
e2020JE006386.

Peale, S. J. (1969), Generalized Cassini’s laws, Astron. J., 74, 483–489.

Peale, S. J. (1974), Possible histories of the obliquity of Mercury, Astron. J., 79, 722–744.

Peale, S. J. (1976), Does Mercury have a molten core?, Nature, 262, 765–766.

Peale, S. J. (2005), The free precession and libration of Mercury, Icarus, 178, 4–18.

Peale, S. J. (2006), The proximity of Mercury’s spin to Cassini state 1 from adiabatic invariance, Icarus, 181, 338–347.

Peale, S. J., J. L. Margot, S. A. Hauck II, and S. C. Solomon (2014), Effect of core-mantle
and tidal torques on Mercury’s spin axis orientation, Icarus, 231, 206–220.

Peale, S. J., J. L. Margot, S. A. Hauck II, and S. C. Solomon (2016), Consequences of a
solid inner core on Mercury’s spin configuration, Icarus, 264, 443–455.

Perry, M. E., G. A. Neumann, R. J. Phillips, and et al. (2015), The low-degree shape of
Mercury, Geophys. Res. Lett., 42, 6951–6958.

Poincaré, H. (1910), Sur la précession des corps déformables, Bull. Astron. Ser. 1, 27,
321–356.

Pozzo, M., C. Davies, D. Gubbins, and D. Alfé (2012), Thermal and electrical conductivity
of iron at Earth’s core conditions, Nature, 485, 355–358.

Rochester, M. G. (1960), Geomagnetic westward drift and irregularities in the Earth’s
rotation, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., A, 252, 531–555.

Rochester, M. G. (1962), Geomagnetic core-mantle coupling, J. Geophys. Res., 67, 4833–

4836.

Rochester, M. G. (1968), Perturbations in the Earth’s rotation and geomagnetic core-mantle coupling, J. Geomag. Geoelectr., 20, 387–402.

Rochester, M. G. (1976), The secular decrease of obliquity due to dissipative core-mantle

coupling, Geophys. J. R. Astron. Soc., 46, 109–126.

Rutter, M., R. Secco, T. Uchida, H. Liu, Y. Wang, M. Rivers, and S. Sutton (2002a), To
wards evaluating the viscosity of the Earth’s outer core: an experimental high pressure
study of liquid Fe-S (8.5 wt. per cent S), Geophys. Res. Lett., 29, 080,000–1.

Rutter, M. D., R. A. Secco, H. Liu, T. Uchida, M. Rivers, S. Sutton, and Y. Wang
(2002b), Viscosity of liquid Fe at high pressure, Phys. Rev. B, 66, 060,102,
doi:10.1029/2001GL014392.

Schaefer, L., S. B. Jacobsen, J. L. Remo, M. I. Petaev, and D. D. Sasselov (2017), Metal-silicate partitioning and its role in core formation and composition on Super-Earths,

Astrophys. J., 835, 234.

Sori, M. M. (2018), A thin, dense crust for Mercury, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 489, 92–99.

Stark, A., J. Oberst, F. Preusker, S. J. Peale, J.-L. Margot, R. J. Phillips, G. A. Neumann,
S. D. E., M. T. Zuber, and S. C. Solomon (2015a), First MESSENGER orbital observations
of Mercury’s librations, Geophys. Res. Lett., 42, 7881–7889.

Stark, A., J. Oberst, and H. Hussmann (2015b), Mercury’s resonant rotation from secular
orbital elements, Celest. Mech. Dyn. Astr., 123, 263–277.

Stewartson, K., and P. H. Roberts (1963), On the motion of a liquid in a spheroidal cavity
of a precessing rigid body, J. Fluid Mech., 17, 1–20.

Stys, C., and M. Dumberry (2018), The cassini state of the Moon’s inner core, J. Geophys.

Res. Planets, 123, 1–25, doi:10.1029/2018JE005607.

Van Hoolst, T. (2015), Rotation of the terrestrial planets, in Treatise on Geophysics,
vol. 10, edited by G. Schubert, chap. 4, pp. 121 – 151, Elsevier, Oxford.

Van Hoolst, T., A. Rivoldini, R.-M. Baland, and M. Yseboodt (2012), The effects of tides
and an inner core on the forced libration of mercury, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 333–334,
83–90.

Verma, A. K., and J. L. Margot (2016), Mercury’s gravity, tides, and spin from MESSEN

GER radio science data, J. Geophys. Res. Planets, 121, 1627–1640.

Wessel, P., W. H. F. Smith, R. Scharroo, J. Luis, and F. Wobbe (2013), Generic Mapping
Tools: Improved version released, EOS Trans. AGU, 94, 409–410.

Williams, J. G., and D. H. Boggs (2015), Tides on the Moon: theory and determination of
dissipation, J. Geophys. Res. Planets, 120 (4), 689–724, doi:10.1002/2014JE004755.

Williams, J. G., D. H. Boggs, C. F. Yoder, J. T. Ratcliff, and J. O. Dickey (2001), Lunar
rotational dissipation in solid body and molten core, J. Geophys. Res., 106, 27,933–
27,968.

Williams, J. G., A. S. Konopliv, D. H. Boggs, R. S. Park, D.-N. Yuan, F. G. Lemoine,
S. Goossens, E. Mazarico, F. Nimmo, R. C. Weber, S. W. Asmar, H. J. Melosh, G. A.

Neumann, R. J. Phillips, D. E. Smith, S. C. Solomon, M. M. Watkins, M. A. Wieczorek,
J. C. Andrews-Hanna, J. W. Head, W. S. Kiefer, I. Matsuyama, P. J. McGovern, G. J.

Taylor, and M. T. Zuber (2014), Lunar interior properties from the GRAIL mission, J.

Geophys. Res. Planets, 119 (7), 1546–1578, doi:10.1002/2013JE004559.

Yoder, C. F. (1981), The free librations of a dissipative Moon, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond.

A, 303, 327–338.

Yseboodt, M., and J. L. Margot (2006), Evolution of Mercury’s obliquity, Icarus, 181,
327–337.
