Astronomy&Astrophysicsmanuscriptno.solar˙model˙v10˙corrected ©ESO2022
January4,2022
Local heating due to convective overshooting and the solar
modelling problem
I.Baraffe1,2,T.Constantino1,J.Clarke1,A.LeSaux1,2,T.Goffrey4,T.Guillet1,J.Pratt3,D.G.Vlaykov1
1 UniversityofExeter,PhysicsandAstronomy,EX44QLExeter,UK(e-mail:i.baraffe@ex.ac.uk)
2 E´coleNormaleSupe´rieure,Lyon,CRAL(UMRCNRS5574),Universite´deLyon,France
3 DepartmentofPhysicsandAstronomy,GeorgiaStateUniversity,AtlantaGA30303,USA
4 CentreforFusion,SpaceandAstrophysics,DepartmentofPhysics,UniversityofWarwick,Coventry,CV47AL,UK
ABSTRACT
2202
Recent hydrodynamical simulations of convection in a solar-like model suggest that penetrative convective flows at the boundary
oftheconvectiveenvelopemodifythethermalbackgroundintheovershootinglayer.Basedontheseresults,weimplementinone-
dimensional stellar evolution codes a simple prescription to modify the temperature gradient below the convective boundary of a
solar model. This simple prescription qualitatively reproduces the behaviour found in the hydrodynamical simulations, namely a
naJ
localheatingandsmoothingofthetemperaturegradientbelowtheconvectiveboundary.Weshowthatintroducinglocalheatingin
theovershootinglayercanreducethesound-speeddiscrepancyusuallyreportedbetweensolarmodelsandthestructureoftheSun
inferred from helioseismology. It also affects key quantities in the convective envelope, such as the density, the entropy, and the
1 speedofsound.Theseeffectscouldhelpreducethediscrepanciesbetweensolarmodelsandobservedconstraintsbasedonseismic
inversions of the Ledoux discriminant. Since mixing due to overshooting and local heating are the result of the same convective
]RS.hp-ortsa[
penetrationprocess,thegoalofthisworkistoinvitesolarmodellerstoconsiderbothprocessesforamoreconsistentapproach.
Keywords.Convection–Hydrodynamics–Stars:evolution–Sun:evolution-helioseismology-interior
1. Introduction baseoftheconvectivezone,Christensen-Dalsgaardetal.(2011)
found that models that better fit the helioseismic data have a
Modelling the internal structure of the Sun is still a challenge.
weakly sub-adiabatic temperature gradient in the lower part of
A recent review by Christensen-Dalsgaard (2021) describes in
theconvectivezoneandasmoothtransitiontotheradiativegra-
detailthelong-standingeffortstoimprovesolarmodels.Theso-
dientintheovershootinglayer.ButChristensen-Dalsgaardetal.
lar modelling problem refers to the discrepancy between helio- (2011)notedthattherequiredtemperaturestratificationisdiffi-
1v00200.1022:viXra seismology and solar interior models that adopt low metallici- culttoreconcilewithexistingovershootingmodelsandnumer-
tiespredictedbythethree-dimensional(3D)atmospheremodels
ical simulations. They concluded that only non-local turbulent
of,forexample,Asplundetal.(2009)andCaffauetal.(2011),
convectionmodelscouldproducethedesireddegreeofsmooth-
in contrast to the high metallicities based on previous litera-
nessinthetransition(seeforexampleZhang&Li2012;Zhang
ture compilations by, for example, Anders & Grevesse (1989)
et al. 2012). But these non-local models remain uncertain, and
and Grevesse & Noels (1993). Asplund et al. (2021) have re-
their description of overshooting under the conditions found at
cently confirmed with state-of-the-art 3D simulations the rela-
the base of the solar convective zone is yet to be validated.
tively low metal abundances for the Sun. Asplund et al. (2021)
Zhang et al. (2019) explored the impact of overshooting by
consider that their study yields the most reliable solar abun-
introducing a parametrised turbulent kinetic energy flux based
dancesavailabletoday,suggestingthatthesolarmodellingprob-
on a model with parameters that are adjusted to improve the
lemisnolongeraproblemofabundancesbutratheraproblem
helioseismic properties. They suggest that amelioration can be
ofstellarphysics.Thetreatmentofmixingbelowtheconvective
obtained specifically below the convective envelope. However,
zoneisoneofthekeyprocessesthatcouldimprovesolarmod-
Zhangetal.(2019)findthatthismodelcannotsolvethewhole
els.Severalstudiesindeedrevealthattheprocessofconvective
solarproblembecausesuchafluxworsensthesound-speedpro-
penetration, also called overshooting, at the bottom of the con-
fileinthedeepradiativeinterioroftheirsolarmodel.Giventhe
vectiveenvelopecouldplayanimportantroleinimprovingthe
uncertaintiesregardingthetemperaturestratificationoftheover-
agreement between solar models and helioseismic constraints shootingregion,solarmodellershaveconsideredtheseeffectsas
(seeforexampleChristensen-Dalsgaardetal.2011;Zhangetal. secondaryandhavefocusedtheireffortsonexploringtheimpact
2012; Buldgen et al. 2019b). Overshooting in solar models has
ofsolarabundances,microphysics(opacities,equationsofstate,
mostoftenbeentreatedusingdiffusiveorinstantaneouschemi-
nuclear reaction rates), and chemical mixing and diffusion (see
calmixing.Atemperaturegradientthatsharplytransitionsfrom
details and references in the review of Buldgen et al. 2019a).
a nearly adiabatic form to a radiative form is usually assumed, Additional, more exotic effects such as early disk accretion or
as suggested by the theoretical work of Zahn (1991). Models
solar-wind mass loss (Zhang et al. 2019; Kunitomo & Guillot
with a smoother transition have also been investigated. Based
2021)arealsoattractingincreasingattention.
on the analysis of models with different stratifications near the
To reinvigorate the debate, Buldgen et al. (2019b) recently
Sendoffprintrequeststo:I.Baraffe highlightedonceagainhowthetransitionofthetemperaturegra-
1
Baraffeetal.:Localheatingduetoconvectiveovershootingandthesolarmodellingproblem
dientjustbelowtheconvectiveenvelopecansignificantlyimpact tionprocesstothelocalheatingandtotheradiativebumpinthe
the disagreement between solar models and helioseismic con- overshootinglayer.Thesolar-likestarsimulatedinB21isbased
straints. Their results, based on a method that combines multi- on a model that is not thermally relaxed. It is reasonable to as-
ple structural inversions, suggest that the transition in temper- sumethatthelocalheatingseeninB21ispresentinstarsbecause
ature gradient is improperly reproduced by adopting either an thenegativeheatfluxintheovershootinglayerandthebumpin
adiabatic or a radiative temperature gradient in the overshoot- theradiativefluxthatcompensatesforthisfeaturearepersistent.
ing layer. The solution should be somewhere in between these Thesetwofeaturesarealsocommonlyobservedinotherhydro-
twoextremes.Christensen-Dalsgaardetal.(2018)alsonotethat dynamical simulations, as mentioned above. An exploration of
an increase in the temperature at the transition would remove theimpactofthisheatingonstellarevolutionmodelsmayreveal
aremainingsmallsharpdipinthespeedofsoundimmediately thatheatingisanecessaryaspectofmodelsforovershooting.
beneaththeconvectivezoneofthemodel.Amajordifficultyis
todisentangletheeffectsofovershootfromtheeffectsofopaci-
ties,whichcanalsoalterthetemperaturegradientintheselayers.
Giventhelargenumberofparameterstodealwithinordertoim-
prove solar models and the current lack of strong arguments in
favour of modifying the thermal stratification in the overshoot-
inglayer,therehasbeennorealmotivationtodeviatefromthe
traditional picture of a sharp transition as formalised by Zahn
(1991).
Thepresentworkismotivatedbyargumentsinspiredbyhy-
drodynamicalsimulationsofconvectionandconvectivepenetra-
tioninsolar-likemodels.Recenthydrodynamicalsimulationsby
Baraffeetal.(2021,hereafterB21)highlighttheprocessoflocal
heatingintheovershootingregionduetopenetratingconvective
motions across the convective boundary. In the following, we
analyse thepotential impact ofthis feature on one-dimensional
(1D) stellar evolution structures in the context of solar models.
The hydrodynamical results of B21 are briefly summarised in
Sect. 2, and their impact on 1D models are analysed in Sect. 3
anddiscussedinSect.4.
2. Modificationofthethermalbackgroundinthe
overshootinglayer:Resultsfrom
two-dimensionalhydrodynamicalsimulations
B21 performed two-dimensional (2D) fully compressible time-
implicitsimulationsofconvectionandconvectivepenetrationin
a solar-like model with the MUlti-dimensional Stellar Implicit
Code MUSIC (Viallet et al. 2011, 2016; Goffrey et al. 2017).
The main motivation was to explore the impact of an artificial
increaseinthestellarluminosityonthepropertiesofconvection Fig.1. Radial profile of the temperature departure ∆T/T 0 from
and convective penetration. This procedure is a common tactic theinitialprofileT 0andofthesub-adiabaticity(∇−∇ ad)closeto
adopted in hydrodynamical simulations of convection (Rogers theconvectiveboundarypredictedby2Dhydrodynamicalsimu-
etal.2006;Meakin&Arnett2007;Brunetal.2011;Hotta2017; lations(B21)ofsolar-likemodels.Thelowerpanelcorresponds
Edelmannetal.2019).TheexperimentsofB21highlighttheim- to the model with a realistic stellar luminosity and the upper
pactofpenetrativedownflowsonthelocalthermalbackground panel to a model with luminosity enhanced by a factor of ten.
intheovershootinglayer.Theyillustratehowconvectivedown- The dash-dotted red lines show ∆T/T 0 (in %), the relative dif-
flows,whenpenetratingtheregionbelowtheconvectivebound- ferencebetweenthetimeandspaceaveragesofthetemperature,
aryoftheenvelope,caninducealocalheatingandamodification T,andtheinitialtemperature,T 0.Thesolidbluelinesshowthe
ofthetemperaturegradientasaresultofcompressionandshear time and space averages of the sub-adiabaticity (∇−∇ ad). The
in the overshooting layer. This modification of the local back- dashedblacklinesshowtheinitialprofileofthesub-adiabaticity,
ground is connected to a local increase in the radiative flux to (∇−∇ ad) init.Theconvectiveboundaryisindicatedbythevertical
counterbalancethenegativeenthalpyflux(orheatflux)produced solidline(seedetailsinB21)
by penetrating flows. The negative peak of the enthalpy flux
andthepositivebumpoftheradiativefluxbelowtheconvective
boundary are well-known features described in many numeri- The behaviour of the thermal profile below the convective
calworks(Hurlburtetal.1986;Muthsametal.1995;Brummell boundary found in the simulations of B21 is illustrated in Fig.
et al. 2002; Brun et al. 2011; Hotta 2017; Ka¨pyla¨ 2019; Cai 1.Itisdisplayedforthemodelwitharealisticstellarluminosity
2020).Afewworks(Rogersetal.2006;Vialletetal.2013;Korre (lowerpanel).Wealsoshowtheresultsforamodelwithanartifi-
et al. 2019; Higl et al. 2021) have also reported a modification cialenhancementintheluminositybyafactoroftenbecausethe
ofthelocalthermalbackgroundintheovershootingregion,but featuresareintensifiedinthese‘boosted’models(upperpanel).
withoutprovidingadetaileddescription.ThesimulationsofB21 Thefigureshowsthelocalheatingintheovershootinglayerand
provideaphysicalexplanationthatlinkstheconvectivepenetra- itsimpactonthesub-adiabaticity(∇−∇ ),with∇ = dlogT the
ad dlogP
2
Baraffeetal.:Localheatingduetoconvectiveovershootingandthesolarmodellingproblem
temperature gradient and ∇ = dlogT| the adiabatic gradient. entropydiscrepancy(S −S )/S hastwopositivepeaksin
ad dlogP S Sun ref ref
Theinitialstratificationbelowtheconvectiveboundary(located theradiativezone,onejustbelowtheovershootingregionanda
at r = 0.6734 × R for this specific stellar model) is set by larger peak deeper at ∼ 40% of the stellar radius. This discrep-
star
thestableradiativegradient,∇ (seethedashedblacklinebe- ancyisnegativeintheconvectivezone.Thecorrectionsapplied
rad
lowtheconvectiveboundaryinFig.1).B21showthat,asare- toAhelpreducetheseentropydiscrepanciesinbothregions.
sultofthelocalheatingbelowtheconvectiveboundarycharac- The fourth concerns the density. The quantity (ρ Sun −
terisedbythebumpintemperaturedifference∆T/T 0 displayed ρ ref)/ρ ref has a negative peak in the radiative region, at ∼ 35%
in Fig. 1, the temperature gradient becomes less sub-adiabatic ofthestellarradius,andispositiveintheconvectivezone.
immediately below the convective boundary1. The net result is Importantly,Buldgenetal.(2020)mentionthattheirrecon-
a smoother transition just below the convective boundary with struction procedure gives similar Ledoux discriminant profiles
a temperature gradient that has an intermediate value between for a wide range of initial reference models. We used these re-
the radiative temperature gradient and the adiabatic one. In the sults to gauge whether the modifications of the thermal profile
next section we analyse the impact of this local heating on 1D predicted by B21 can help in qualitatively improving all the
solar structures by adopting a simple prescription that mimics structuralquantitiesusedbyBuldgenetal.(2020).
the behaviour of the temperature gradient suggested by hydro-
dynamicalsimulations.
3.2. Testingone-dimensionalsolarmodels
Ourmainmotivationistoshowthepotentialimpactofthelocal
3. Impactonone-dimensionalsolarstructure
heating described in Sect. 2 on stellar models. We are not aim-
models inginthisshortworkatconstructingthebestsolarmodeltofit
helioseismicconstraints.Usingstellarevolutioncodes,wehave
3.1. Helioseismicconstraints
adopted two different methods that can be found in the litera-
Ourprimarygoalinthisshortpaperistoillustratethepotential, turetoconstructsolarmodels(e.g.Zhangetal.2012;Vinyoles
qualitative impact of the local heating produced by overshoot- et al. 2017). Our first method relies on the thermal relaxation
ing. We adopted a strategy inspired by the analysis of Buldgen of a reference model with solar radius and luminosity that is
et al. (2020), who constructed a static structure of the Sun in modifiedtoreproducethetemperaturegradientintheovershoot-
agreement with seismic inversions of the Ledoux discriminant inglayersuggestedbyhydrodynamicalsimulations.Inthiscase,
definedby thechemicalabundancesarenotmodifiedbynuclearreactions,
mixing, or microscopic diffusion during the relaxation process.
1 dlnP dlnρ
A= − , (1) For these tests, we used the 1D Lyon stellar evolution code
Γ dlnr dlnr (Baraffeetal.1998).Werepeatedthisexperimentbasedonther-
1
with Γ = (∂lnP/∂lnρ) . Starting from a reference evolu- mal relaxation with the stellar evolution code MONSTAR (e.g.
1 ad
Constantino et al. 2014) and obtained the same qualitative re-
tionary model, Buldgen et al. (2020) used an inversion pro-
sults.
cedure to iteratively reconstruct a solar model. Successive in-
The second method considers models that account for the
versions of the Ledoux discriminant allowed them to obtain a
modification of the temperature gradient in the overshooting
model-independentprofileforthisquantity.Theirreconstruction
layer from the zero age main sequence (ZAMS). The models
method also gives solar structures that are in excellent agree-
arethenevolveduntiltheyreachthesolarradiusandluminosity.
mentwithotherstructuralinversions,namelytheentropy,S,the
squareofthespeedofsound,c2,andthedensity,ρ.Toillustrate With this approach, changes in the chemical abundances from
s nuclearreactions,microscopicdiffusion,andovershootingmix-
the convergence of their reconstruction procedure, they show
ing are also consistent with any modification of the structure
(rightpanelsoftheirFigs.3-6)thesuccessiveiterationsthatcon-
induced by the forced local heating in the overshooting layer.
verge to an excellent level of agreement for the four structural
inversions(A,S,c2,ρ)startingfromtheinitialreferencemodel These tests were performed with MONSTAR as it includes the
adoptedintheirwos treatmentofmicroscopicdiffusion.
rk.Thedifferencesfoundbetweentherecon-
The first method allows the impact of local heating in
structedmodelandthereferencemodelareusefulastheyindi-
the overshooting layer after thermal relaxation to be isolated.
catethemodificationsofthereferencemodelthatarerequiredto
The second method provides evolutionary models that are self-
convergetowardsasolarmodelinagreementwithhelioseismic
consistentsincetheeffectofthemodificationofthetemperature
data. We recall here the major trends found by Buldgen et al.
gradientisaccountedforduringtheirevolutiononthemainse-
(2020)forthefourstructuralquantities,whichareusedforour
quence.
analysisinSect.3.2.
Inthefollowing,weadoptamodificationofthelocaltemper-
The first concerns the Ledoux discriminant. The major dis-
aturegradientintheovershootinglayerthatqualitativelyrepro-
crepancy between the Sun and the reference model occurs just
ducesthebehaviourdisplayedinFig.1.Wedefineanovershoot-
below the convective boundary, with a large positive bump for
inglengthd = α H ,with H thepressurescaleheight
thequantity(A -A ). ov ov P,CB P,CB
Sun ref
attheconvectiveboundaryandα afreeparameter.Wealsode-
Thesecondconcernsthespeedofsound.Thesamepositive ov
finetworadiallocations,r =r −d andr =r −d /2,
bumpatthesamelocationasfortheLedouxdiscriminant,A,is ov CB ov mid CB ov
observed for the quantity (c2 − c2 )/c2 . The corrections withr CBtheradiallocationoftheconvectiveboundary.Thetem-
s,Sun s,ref s,ref peraturegradientismodifiedasfollows.Forr ≤ r < r ,we
appliedtoAduringthereconstructionprocedurealsoreducethe mid CB
use
discrepancyinthespeedofsoundintheradiativeregion.
Thethirdconcernstheentropy.Largediscrepanciesareob- ∇=g(r)∇ +(1−g(r))∇ , (2)
ad rad
servedinboththeradiativeregionandtheconvectivezone.The
with
1 Lesssub-adiabaticmeansthat|∇−∇ |decreasescomparedtothe
ad
initialprofile. g(r)= sin{[(r−r )/(r −r )]a×π/2}. (3)
mid CB mid
3
Baraffeetal.:Localheatingduetoconvectiveovershootingandthesolarmodellingproblem
Forr ≤r<r ,weuse byEqs.(2)-(5)yieldssimilarqualitativechangesinthetemper-
ov mid
ature and the sub-adiabaticity close to the convective boundary
∇=∇ −h(r)∇ , (4)
rad ad thatwasfoundinthehydrodynamicalsimulationsofB21.
with
h(r)=b×sin{[(r −r)/(r −r )]×π}. (5)
mid mid ov
Sine functions are used in Eqs. (3) and (5) to reproduce the
smoothvariationsinthetemperaturegradientbelowtheconvec-
tiveboundaryproducedbythehydrodynamicalsimulations.We
haveverifiedthattheresultsareinsensitivetothesmoothnessof
these variations and to the exact shape of the temperature gra-
dientradialprofile.Weadopteda=0.3inEq.(3)asitprovidesa
behaviourforthetemperaturegradientveryclosetotheonedis-
playedinFig.1.Resultsareratherinsensitivetovariationsinthe
valuesofabetween0.2and0.4.Weadoptedb=0.03inEq.(5),
whichalsoprovidesaclosevisualmatchtothehydrodynamical
results,butwenotethattheresultsareinsensitivetothevalueof
b.
3.2.1. Thermalequilibriummodels
Thedetailsoftheprocedureforthefirstmethodarethefollow-
ing.Wecalculatetheevolutionofa1 M modelwithaninitial
(cid:12)
helium mass fraction of 0.28, metallicity Z = 0.02, and a mix-
ing length l = 1.9H . We use a reference model that is in
mix P
thermal equilibrium2 and has the luminosity and radius of the
current Sun. Starting from this reference model, the tempera-
ture gradient is modified over a prescribed depth to mimic the
impact of overshooting according to the hydrodynamical sim-
ulations described in Sect. 2. We adopt the prescription given
byEqs.(2)-(5)overadistanced belowtheconvectivebound-
ov
ary.WeshowtheresultsinFig.2forα =0.15andα =0.20.
ov ov
Theseovershootingwidthsareingoodagreementwiththemaxi-
maldepthreachedbydownflowsbelowtheconvectiveboundary
predicted by the hydrodynamical simulations for the solar-like
model investigated in B21. We note that the stellar model used
inB21isslightlyunder-luminouscomparedtotheSun(seeB21
fordetails).B21alsomentionthatoneshouldbecautiouswhen
directlyapplyingtheovershootingdepthspredictedbytheirsim-
Fig.2. Radial profile of the temperature difference and of the
ulationstorealstarssincethefinalrelaxedstateforthesesimula-
tions may have different properties from non-thermally relaxed sub-adiabaticityofa1Dsolar-likestructurewithamodifiedtem-
perature gradient in the overshooting layer according to Eqs.
states. We varied α between 0.15 and 0.35 and find that the
ov (2)-(5). The temperature gradient is modified over a distance
results do not change qualitatively. However, the amplitude of
d = α H ,withα =0.15inthelowerpanelandα =0.20
the variations in the model properties depends on d (see be- ov ov P,CB ov ov
ov intheupperpanel.Thedash-dottedredlinesshowthepercent-
low).Asshownbelow,thissimpleprescriptionimplementedin
agerelativetemperaturedifference,∆T/T ,with∆T =T−T .
a stellar evolution code yields a local increase in the tempera- ref ref
Thesolidbluelinescorrespondtothesub-adiabaticity(∇−∇ ).
ture below the convective boundary, similar to that observed in ad
The dashed black lines show the sub-adiabaticity of the refer-
thehydrodynamicalsimulations.WestressthatEqs.(2)-(5)have
encemodel.Theconvectiveboundaryisindicatedbythevertical
beenchosenforsimplicity.Theyareonlyaroughapproximation
solidline.Theverticaldashedlineineachpanelislocatedata
thatcanmimicthethermalprofilebehavioursuggestedinthe2D
distanced belowtheconvectiveboundary.
simulations. ov
Themodelwithamodifiedtemperaturegradientisthenther-
mally relaxed, that is to say, it is evolved over many thermal
Theimpactonthewholestellarstructurewasquantifiedby
timescaleswithoutanymodificationoftheabundancesfromnu-
comparingthefourstructuralquantities(A,S,c2,ρ)betweenthe
clearreactionsuntilthermalequilibriumisreached.Thetemper- s
modified and the reference model. The results are displayed in
ature gradient is modified in the overshooting layer during the
Fig.3,with∆Xdefinedas(X−X )foranystructuralquantityX.
wholerelaxationprocess,andthisisreferredtoasa‘forcedlocal ref
Theforcedlocalheatingintheovershootinglayerproducessim-
heating’.Thisprocedureensuresthatthemodelwithamodified
ilarpositivepeaksfor∆A,∆S,and∆c2,asfoundforthetemper-
temperaturegradientcanbeconsistentlycomparedtotherefer- s
ature.Themodificationthusprovidesthecorrectionrequiredto
ence model. As shown in Fig. 2, the simple prescription given
improvethediscrepancyfortheLedouxdiscriminantdescribed
2 Thermalequilibriummeansthatthetotalnuclearenergyproduced in the first of the trends outlined in Sect. 3.1. Unsurprisingly,
inthecentralregionsbalancestheradiativelossesatthesurface,i.e.the such a modification of the temperature gradient is expected to
totalnuclearluminosity,L ,equalsthetotalstellarluminosity,L. improve the agreement with helioseismic constraints and help
nuc
4
Baraffeetal.:Localheatingduetoconvectiveovershootingandthesolarmodellingproblem
remove the sound speed anomaly below the convective bound-
ary (second trend in Sect. 3.1), as suggested by the results of
Christensen-Dalsgaardetal.(2011).Butitisalsointerestingto
notethatsuchamodificationyieldsaslightcoolingofthecon-
vective zone (see Fig. 2) and thus a negative difference for the
entropy(seeFig.3).Anegativedifferenceintheconvectiveen-
velope is in agreement with the correction required for the ref-
erence model of Buldgen et al. (2020) to better match the Sun
(seethirdtrendinSect.3.1).Regardingthedensity,themodifi-
cation of the temperature gradient has an interesting impact in
theradiativezone,withalargedecreaseinthedensitycompared
tothereferencemodeloverabroadregionbelowtheconvective
boundary.Theimpactonthedensityintheconvectiveregionfor
thisspecificmodelispartlyinagreementwiththecorrectionre-
quiredforthisquantityintheBuldgenetal.(2020)study,witha
positivedifferencefoundonlyintheupperpartoftheconvective
envelope(seethefourthtrendinSect.3.1).
Thesetrendsareinsensitivetothedepthoverwhichthetem-
peraturegradientismodified.Increasingthedepthincreasesthe
magnitudeofthedifferencesbuthasnoimpactontheirsign. We
findthatthemaximumvariationinthemodelproperties,suchas
thespeedofsound,∆c2/c2 ,roughlyscaleswithd2 .Thisscal-
s s,ref ov
ingislinkedtotheintegratedareabetweenthemodifiedtemper-
aturegradientcurveandtheoneforthereference(non-modified)
temperature gradient, which roughly decreases linearly with r.
Thisareaisproportionaltothesquareoftheovershootingdepth,
and consequently, the maximum variation in the model proper-
tiesisalsoproportionaltod2 .Thequalitativetrendsalsoremain
ov
the same whether overshooting mixing in the reference model
isignoredorincludedusingastepfunction(withinstantaneous
mixing)oranexponentialdecayforthediffusioncoefficient(e.g.
Freytagetal.1996).
3.2.2. Self-consistentevolutionarymodels
For the tests based on the second method, we ran different sets
ofmodelswithdifferentcombinationsofassumptions,including Fig.3. Difference of various structural quantities between a
or not microscopic diffusion and with or without overshooting model with a modified temperature gradient in the overshoot-
inglayerandareferencemodelcalculatedwiththeLyonstellar
mixing. When overshooting mixing was included in the over-
evolutioncode.Thetemperaturegradientinthemodifiedmodel
shooting layer, it was based either on a step function or on an
exponentialdecayforthediffusioncoefficient.Microscopicdif- is changed over a distance d ov = α ovH P,CB below the convec-
tive boundary (indicated by the vertical solid line). The lower
fusionforHandHewasimplementedaccordingtoThouletal.
panel shows the results for α = 0.15 and the upper panel for
(1994). For these tests, the temperature gradient was modified ov
α =0.20.
accordingto Eqs.(2)-(5).AllmodelsstartfromtheZAMSand ov
areevolveduntiltheyreachthesolarradiusandluminosityatthe
sameage.Thiswasachievedbymakingsmalladjustmentstothe
totheassumptionsregardingwhetherovershootingmixingisin-
mixinglength,l .Themodelswithtemperaturegradientmod-
mix cludedornot.Butatleastwefindsolutionsthatarecompatible
ificationswerecomparedtotherelevantreferencemodel,which
withthefourtrendsfoundbyBuldgenetal.(2020)forthefour
has no modification of the temperature gradient but everything
structural quantities. This is illustrated in Fig. 4 with a model
else is the same (i.e. the same treatment of microscopic diffu-
that accounts for step function overshooting mixing over a dis-
sionandofovershootingmixing).Theevolutionarymodelswith
tanced =0.15H (lowerpanel)andd =0.20H (upper
temperaturegradientmodificationsarethusself-consistent.The ov P,CB ov P,CB
panel).
maindifferencebetweenthisapproachandtheoneintheprevi-
oussectionisthatthesemodelsaccumulatesmalldifferencesin,
for example, central H abundance when compared to their ref-
4. Conclusion
erence model. These tests produce the same trends in the over-
shooting layer as found for the tests based on the first method The tests performed in Sect. 3 are based on different methods
(Sect. 3.2.1), independently of the treatment of overshooting (relaxedmodelsversusconsistentevolution)thatcanbeusedto
mixing and whether microscopic diffusion is included or not. construct solar models. Independently of the method used, the
Intheconvectivezone,allmodelsgiveapositivedifferencefor tests show that a local increase in the temperature in the over-
thedensitybetweenthemodelwithamodifiedtemperaturegra- shootingregionduetoconvectivepenetrationprovidesthequali-
dient and the relevant reference model. For the other quantities tativeeffectsrequiredtoimprovethespeedofsounddiscrepancy
(S,c2),thedifferencesintheconvectivezoneareverysensitive belowtheconvectiveboundary.Thisdiscrepancyispersistentin
s
5
Baraffeetal.:Localheatingduetoconvectiveovershootingandthesolarmodellingproblem
speed of sound in the convective envelope after thermal relax-
ation or evolution on the main sequence. How these quantities
areaffectedintheconvectiveenvelopecomparedtoareference
modelwithnolocalheatingdependsonthestrategyforbuilding
solarmodelsandonthetreatmentofovershootingmixing.This
mixing is obviously linked to the local heating given that both
resultfromthesamedynamicalprocess.Acombinedtestingof
botheffectsinstellarmodelscouldprovidemoreconstraintson
thegeneralprocessofovershooting.
Increasingly, efforts are now devoted to characterising the
process of convective boundary mixing in stellar models based
on multi-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations. More work
isrequiredtoobtainreliabledeterminationsofanovershooting
depth and to describe quantitatively the mixing and impact on
the temperature gradient. Understanding the effects of rotation
andmagneticfieldsonovershootingisasignificantlymoredif-
ficult theoretical and numerical problem to address; however,
efforts to study these combined non-linear effects are ongoing
(Hotta 2017; Korre et al. 2021). Despite the limitations of ex-
isting hydrodynamical simulations, they are already providing
constraints on physical processes usually treated with several
free parameters in 1D stellar evolution models. They can thus
limit the degrees of freedom in a problem as complex as so-
larmodelling.Ourprimarygoalinthisworkistohighlightthe
potentialimpactofconvectivepenetrationonthethermalback-
groundintheovershootingregion.TheprocessesstudiedinB21
thatproducealocalchangeinthetemperaturegradientarealso
responsibleforthemixinginthisregion.Becausemuchobserva-
tionalevidencepointstowardstheneedforextramixingatcon-
vective boundaries, for example lithium depletion in solar-like
stars (Baraffe et al. 2017), the size of convective cores (Claret
& Torres 2016), and colour-magnitude diagrams (Castro et al.
2014), solar modellers often include this extra mixing in their
models.Butaconsistentapproachshouldalsorequireaccount-
ingforalocalchangeinthetemperaturegradient.Theimpactof
thislocalheatinggoesintherightdirectiontoimprovenotonly
the discrepancies of solar models below the convective bound-
Fig.4. Difference of various structural quantities between a ary,butalsointheconvectiveenvelope.Thiseffectoffersanin-
modified model and a reference model calculated with the
teresting step forward for solving the solar modelling problem.
MONSTAR stellar evolution code. The reference model is
Inthisexploratorywork,weadoptasimpleprescriptionforthe
evolved from the ZAMS with microscopic diffusion and step
local heating in the overshooting layer since the main goal is
functionovershootingmixingoveradistanced =α H be-
ov ov P,CB to highlight its qualitative impact on stellar models. However,
lowtheconvectiveboundary.Thelowerpanelshowstheresults thiseffectshouldnotbeconsideredasanotherfreeparameterin
forα = 0.15andtheupperpanelforα = 0.20.Themodels
ov ov the solar modelling problem. Future multi-dimensional hydro-
with a modified temperature gradient in the overshooting layer
dynamicalsimulationswillenablethisprocess,anditstreatment
(samemicroscopicdiffusionandovershootingmixingtreatment
in1Dstellarevolutioncodes,tobebetterconstrained.
as the reference model) are evolved similarly from the ZAMS.
Theconvectiveboundaryisindicatedbytheverticalsolidline.
5. Acknowledgements
solar models that use low solar metal abundances. This is not Wethankouranonymousrefereeforvaluablecommentswhich
surprising because an increase in the temperature in this spe- helpedimprovingthemanuscript.Thisworkissupportedbythe
cificregionhaspreviouslybeeninvokedintheliteraturetosolve ERC grant No. 787361-COBOM and the consolidated STFC
this problem, as mentioned in Sect. 1. However, the details of grant ST/R000395/1. IB thanks the Max Planck Institut fu¨r
thephysicalprocessresponsibleforthislocalheatinghavebeen Astrophysics(Garching)forwarmhospitalityduringcompletion
lacking, whereas we can now suggest an explanation based on ofpartofthiswork.Theauthorswouldliketoacknowledgethe
the B21 results. The trends that we find for the four structural use of the University of Exeter High-Performance Computing
quantities (A, S, c2, ρ) are robust below the convective bound- (HPC) facility ISCA and of the DiRAC Data Intensive service
s
aryandinalargefractionoftheradiativecore,independentlyof atLeicester,operatedbytheUniversityofLeicesterITServices,
thetreatmentofmixinganddiffusionandofthemethodforcon- whichformspartoftheSTFCDiRACHPCFacility.Theequip-
structingthemodelsinSects.3.2.1and3.2.2.Ourexperiments ment was funded by BEIS capital funding via STFC capital
additionally show that such a local change in the temperature, grants ST/K000373/1 and ST/R002363/1 and STFC DiRAC
despitebeingmadeoveraverylimitedregionbelowtheconvec- OperationsgrantST/R001014/1.DiRACispartoftheNational
tive boundary, can also affect the density, the entropy, and the e-Infrastructure.
6
Baraffeetal.:Localheatingduetoconvectiveovershootingandthesolarmodellingproblem
References
Anders,E.&Grevesse,N.1989,Geochim.Cosmochim.Acta,53,197
Asplund,M.,Amarsi,A.M.,&Grevesse,N.2021,A&A,653,A141
Asplund,M.,Grevesse,N.,Sauval,A.J.,&Scott,P.2009,ARA&A,47,481
Baraffe,I.,Chabrier,G.,Allard,F.,&Hauschildt,P.H.1998,A&A,337,403
Baraffe,I.,Pratt,J.,Goffrey,T.,etal.2017,ApJ,845,L6
Baraffe,I.,Pratt,J.,Vlaykov,D.G.,etal.2021,A&A,654,A126
Brummell,N.H.,Clune,T.L.,&Toomre,J.2002,ApJ,570,825
Brun,A.S.,Miesch,M.S.,&Toomre,J.2011,ApJ,742,79
Buldgen,G.,Eggenberger,P.,Baturin,V.A.,etal.2020,A&A,642,A36
Buldgen,G.,Salmon,S.,&Noels,A.2019a,FrontiersinAstronomyandSpace
Sciences,6,42
Buldgen,G.,Salmon,S.J.A.J.,Noels,A.,etal.2019b,A&A,621,A33
Caffau, E., Ludwig, H. G., Steffen, M., Freytag, B., & Bonifacio, P. 2011,
Sol.Phys.,268,255
Cai,T.2020,ApJ,888,46
Castro,N.,Fossati,L.,Langer,N.,etal.2014,A&A,570,L13
Christensen-Dalsgaard,J.2021,LivingReviewsinSolarPhysics,18,2
Christensen-Dalsgaard,J.,Gough,D.O.,&Knudstrup,E.2018,MNRAS,477,
3845
Christensen-Dalsgaard,J.,Monteiro,M.J.P.F.G.,Rempel,M.,&Thompson,
M.J.2011,MNRAS,414,1158
Claret,A.&Torres,G.2016,A&A,592,A15
Constantino,T.,Campbell,S.,Gil-Pons,P.,&Lattanzio,J.2014,ApJ,784,56
Edelmann,P.V.F.,Ratnasingam,R.P.,Pedersen,M.G.,etal.2019,ApJ,876,4
Freytag,B.,Ludwig,H.G.,&Steffen,M.1996,A&A,313,497
Goffrey,T.,Pratt,J.,Viallet,M.,etal.2017,A&A,600,A7
Grevesse,N.&Noels,A.1993,inOriginandEvolutionoftheElements,ed.
N.Prantzos,E.Vangioni-Flam,&M.Casse,15–25
Higl,J.,Mu¨ller,E.,&Weiss,A.2021,A&A,646,A133
Hotta,H.2017,ApJ,843,52
Hurlburt,N.E.,Toomre,J.,&Massaguer,J.M.1986,ApJ,311,563
Ka¨pyla¨,P.J.2019,A&A,631,A122
Korre,L.,Brummell,N.,Garaud,P.,&Guervilly,C.2021,MNRAS,503,362
Korre,L.,Garaud,P.,&Brummell,N.H.2019,MNRAS,484,1220
Kunitomo,M.&Guillot,T.2021,arXive-prints,arXiv:2109.06492
Meakin,C.A.&Arnett,D.2007,ApJ,667,448
Muthsam,H.J.,Goeb,W.,Kupka,F.,Liebich,W.,&Zoechling,J.1995,A&A,
293,127
Rogers,T.M.,Glatzmaier,G.A.,&Jones,C.A.2006,ApJ,653,765
Thoul,A.A.,Bahcall,J.N.,&Loeb,A.1994,ApJ,421,828
Viallet,M.,Baraffe,I.,&Walder,R.2011,A&A,531,A86
Viallet,M.,Goffrey,T.,Baraffe,I.,etal.2016,A&A,586,A153
Viallet,M.,Meakin,C.,Arnett,D.,&Moca´k,M.2013,ApJ,769,1
Vinyoles,N.,Serenelli,A.M.,Villante,F.L.,etal.2017,ApJ,835,202
Zahn,J.P.1991,A&A,252,179
Zhang,C.,Deng,L.,Xiong,D.,&Christensen-Dalsgaard,J.2012,ApJ,759,
L14
Zhang,Q.S.&Li,Y.2012,ApJ,746,50
Zhang,Q.-S.,Li,Y.,&Christensen-Dalsgaard,J.2019,ApJ,881,103
7
